10-k
1
c68029_10k.htm


bazadebezolkohpepadr="1888659890"







united
states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549

form 10-k

x annual report pursuant to section
13 or 15(d) 
of the securities exchange act of 1934 
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2011
or
o transition report
pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) 
of the securities exchange act of 1934 
for the transition period from        to 
commission file number 1-8974

honeywell international inc.

(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
delaware
 
 
  
 
 
22-2640650
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
(state or other jurisdiction of
 
 
  
 
 
(i.r.s. employer
 
 
 
 
incorporation or organization)
 
 
  
 
 
identification no.)
 
 
 
 
101 columbia road
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
morris township, new jersey
 
 
  
 
 
07962
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
(address of principal executive offices)
 
 
  
 
 
(zip code)
 
 


registrant’s
telephone number, including area code (973) 455-2000securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
title of each class
 
 
  
 
 
name of each exchange
on which registered
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
common stock, par value $1 per
share*
 
 
  
 
 
new york stock exchange
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
chicago stock exchange
 
 
 
 
9½%
debentures due june 1, 2016 
 
 
  
 
 
new york stock exchange
 
 





* the
common stock is also listed on the london stock exchange.

securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none

indicate by
check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule
405 of the securities act. yes x no o

indicate by
check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
section 13 or section 15(d) of the exchange act. yes o no x

indicate by
check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days. yes x no o

indicate by
check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on
its corporate website, if any, every interactive data file required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (§ 232.405 of this
chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files). yes x no o

indicate by
check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to
this form 10-k. x

indicate by
check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated
filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see definition
of “accelerated filer,” “large accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting
company” in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one): 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
large accelerated filer x
 
 
accelerated filer o
 
 
non-accelerated filer o
 
 
smaller reporting company o
 
 


indicate by
check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2
of the act). yes o no x

the
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by nonaffiliates of the
registrant was approximately $47.1 billion at june 30, 2011.

there were
775,363,731 shares of common stock outstanding at january 31, 2012.

documents incorporated by reference
part iii: proxy statement for annual meeting of shareowners
to be held april 23, 2012.






table of contents


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
item
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
page
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
part i
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
business
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
1a
 
 
  
 
 
risk
factors
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
1b
 
 
  
 
 
unresolved
staff comments
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
properties
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
legal
proceedings
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
executive
officers of the registrant
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
part ii.
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
market
for registrant’s common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
selected
financial data
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
management’s
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
7a
 
 
  
 
 
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
 
 
  
 
 
55
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
  
 
 
financial
statements and supplementary data
 
 
  
 
 
56
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
  
 
 
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
 
 
  
 
 
113
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
9a
 
 
  
 
 
controls
and procedures
 
 
  
 
 
113
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
9b
 
 
  
 
 
other
information
 
 
  
 
 
114
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
part iii.
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
 
 
  
 
 
114
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
executive
compensation
 
 
  
 
 
114
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
 
 
  
 
 
114
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
certain
relationships and related transactions
 
 
  
 
 
117
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
principal
accounting fees and services
 
 
  
 
 
117
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
part iv.
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
exhibits
and financial statement schedules
 
 
  
 
 
118
 
 
 
 
signatures
 
 
  
 
 
119
 
 






part i.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item
1.
 
 
business
 
 

honeywell
international inc. (honeywell) is a diversified technology and manufacturing
company, serving customers worldwide with aerospace products and services,
control, sensing and security technologies for buildings, homes and industry,
turbochargers, automotive products, specialty chemicals, electronic and
advanced materials, process technology for refining and petrochemicals, and
energy efficient products and solutions for homes, business and transportation.
honeywell was incorporated in delaware in 1985.

we
maintain an internet website at http://www.honeywell.com. our annual report on
form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and any
amendments to those reports, are available free of charge on our website under
the heading “investor relations” (see “sec filings & reports”) immediately
after they are filed with, or furnished to, the securities and exchange
commission (sec). in addition, in this form 10-k, the company incorporates by
reference certain information from parts of its proxy statement for the 2012
annual meeting of stockholders, which we expect to file with the sec on or
about march 8, 2012, and which will also be available free of charge on our
website.

information
relating to corporate governance at honeywell, including honeywell’s code of
business conduct, corporate governance guidelines and charters of the
committees of the board of directors are also available, free of charge, on our
website under the heading “investor relations” (see “corporate governance”), or
by writing to honeywell, 101 columbia road, morris township, new jersey 07962,
c/o vice president and corporate secretary. honeywell’s code of business
conduct applies to all honeywell directors, officers (including the chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and controller) and employees.

major businesses

we
globally manage our business operations through four businesses that are
reported as operating segments: aerospace, automation and control solutions,
performance materials and technologies (formerly specialty materials), and
transportation systems. financial information related to our operating segments
is included in note 23 of notes to financial statements in “item 8. financial
statements and supplementary data.” 

the
major products/services, customers/uses and key competitors of each of our
operating segments follows:

aerospace

our
aerospace segment is a leading global provider of integrated avionics, engines,
systems and service solutions for aircraft manufacturers, airlines, business
and general aviation, military, space and airport operations.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
turbine propulsion engines
 
 
  
 
 
tfe731 turbofan
tfe1042 turbofan
atf3 turbofan
f125 turbofan
f124 turbofan
alf502 turbofan
lf507 turbofan
cfe738 turbofan
htf 7000 turbofan
t53 turboshaft
t55 turboshaft
cts800 turboshaft
hts900 turboshaft
lt101 turboshaft
tpe 331 turboprop
agt1500 turboshaft
repair,
overhaul and spare
parts
 
 
  
 
 
business,
regional, and general
aviation
commercial helicopters
military vehicles
military helicopters
military trainer
 
 
    
 
 
rolls royce/allison
turbomeca
united technologies
williams
 
 


1







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
auxiliary power units
(apu’s)
 
 
  
 
 
airborne auxiliary power units
jet fuel starters
secondary power systems
ground power units
repair,
overhaul and spare
parts
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
regional, business
and military aircraft
ground power
 
 
  
 
 
united technologies
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
environmental control
systems
 
 
  
 
 
air
management systems:
air conditioning
bleed air
cabin pressure control
air purification and treatment
gas processing
heat exchangers
repair,
overhaul and spare
parts
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
regional and
general aviation aircraft
military aircraft
ground vehicles
spacecraft
 
 
  
 
 
auxilec
barber colman
dukes
eaton-vickers
general electric
goodrich
liebherr
pacific scientific
parker hannifin
tat
united technologies
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
electric power systems
 
 
  
 
 
generators
power distribution & control
power conditioning
repair, overhaul
and spare
parts
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
regional, business
and military aircraft
commercial and military 
helicopters
military vehicles
 
 
  
 
 
general electric
goodrich
safran
united technologies
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
engine systems
accessories
 
 
  
 
 
electronic
and hydromechanical
fuel controls
engine start systems
electronic engine controls
sensors
valves
electric
and pneumatic power
generation systems
thrust
reverser actuation,
pneumatic and electric
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
regional and
general aviation aircraft
military aircraft
 
 
  
 
 
bae controls
goodrich
parker hannifin
united technologies
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
avionics systems
 
 
  
 
 
flight safety systems:
enhanced
ground proximity
warning systems (egpws)
traffic
alert and collision
avoidance systems (tcas)
windshear
detection systems
flight data
and cockpit voice
recorders
weather radar
communication,
navigation
and surveillance systems:
navigation and guidance
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
business and
general aviation aircraft
government aviation
military aircraft
 
 
  
 
 
bae
boeing/jeppesen
garmin
general electric
goodrich
kaiser
l3
lockheed martin
northrop grumman
rockwell collins
thales
trimble/terra
 
 

2







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
systems
global positioning systems
satellite systems
integrated avionics systems
flight management systems
cockpit display systems
data
management and aircraft
performance monitoring
systems
aircraft information systems
network file servers
wireless network transceivers
weather information network
navigation
database
information
cabin management systems
vibration
detection and
monitoring
mission management systems
tactical
data management
systems
maintenance
and health
monitoring systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
universal avionics
universal weather
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
aircraft lighting
 
 
  
 
 
interior
and exterior aircraft
lighting
 
 
  
 
 
commercial,
regional,
business, helicopter and
military aviation aircraft
(operators, oems, parts
distributors and mro
service providers)
 
 
  
 
 
hella/goodrich
lsi
luminator
whelen
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
inertial sensor
 
 
  
 
 
inertial
sensor systems for
guidance, stabilization,
navigation and control
gyroscopes,
accelerometers,
inertial measurement units
and thermal switches
attitude
and heading 
reference systems
 
 
  
 
 
military
and commercial
vehicles
commercial
spacecraft and
launch vehicles
transportation
powered, guided munitions
munitions
 
 
  
 
 
astronautics
kearfott
bae
gec
general electric
goodrich
l3 com
kvh
northrop grumman
rockwell
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
control products
 
 
  
 
 
radar altimeters
pressure products
air data products
thermal switches
magnetic sensors
 
 
  
 
 
military aircraft
powered, guided munitions, uavs
commercial applications
commercial, regional, business
aircraft
 
 
  
 
 
bae
goodrich
northrop grumman
rockwell collins
rosemount
 
 

3







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  



 
 
 
 
space products andsubsystems
 
 
  
 
 
guidance subsystems
control subsystems
processing subsystems
radiation
hardened electronics
and integrated circuits
gps-based
range safety 
systems
gyroscopes
 
 
  
 
 
commercial
and military
spacecraft
dod
faa
nasa
 
 
  
 
 
bae
ithaco
l3
northrop grumman
raytheon
 
 
 
  



 
 
 
 
management and technical
services
 
 
  
 
 
maintenance/operation
and
provision of space systems,
services and facilities
systems
engineering and
integration
information technology services
logistics and sustainment
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. government space (nasa)
dod
(logistics and information
services)
faa
doe
local governments
commercial
space ground
segment systems and
services
 
 
  
 
 
bechtelboeing
computer sciences
dyncorp
exelis
lockheed martin
raytheon
saic
the
washington
group
united
space
alliance
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
landing systems
 
 
  
 
 
wheels and brakes
wheel and
brake repair and
overhaul services
 
 
  
 
 
commercial airline, regional,
business and military aircraft
usaf, dod,
doe
boeing, airbus, lockheed
martin
 
 
  
 
 
goodrich
meggitt
messier-bugatti
 
 

4






 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control solutions
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
our automation and control solutions segment is a leading global
provider of environmental and combustion controls, sensing controls, security
and life safety products and services, scanning and mobility devices and
process automation and building solutions and services for homes, buildings
and industrial facilities.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
environmental and
combustion controls;
sensing controls
 
 
  
 
 
heating, ventilating and air
conditioning controls and
components for homes and
buildings 
indoor air quality products
including zoning, air cleaners,
humidification, heat and 
energy recovery ventilators
controls plus integrated
electronic systems for
burners, boilers and
furnaces
consumer household products
including humidifiers and
thermostats
electrical devices and
switches 
water controls 
sensors, measurement,
control
and industrial components
energy demand/response
management products and
services
 
 
  
 
 
original equipment
manufacturers (oems)
distributors 
contractors 
retailers 
system integrators
commercial customers and
homeowners served by
the distributor, wholesaler,
contractor, retail and utility
channels
package and materials handling
operations
appliance manufacturers
transportation companies
aviation companies
food and beverage processors
medical equipment
heat treat processors
computer and business
equipment manufacturers
 
 
  
 
 
bosch
cherry
danfoss
eaton
emerson
endress & hauser
freescale 
semiconductor
ge
holmes
invensys
johnson controls
omron
schneider
siemens
united technologies
yamatake
measurement
specialties
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
security
and life safety
products and services
 
 
  
 
 
security products and
systems
fire products and systems
access controls and closed
circuit television
home health monitoring and 
nurse call systems
gas detection products and
systems
emergency lighting
distribution
personal protection
equipment
 
 
  
 
 
oems
retailers
distributors
commercial customers and
homeowners served by the
the distributor, wholesaler,
contractor, retail and utility
channels
health care organizations
security monitoring service
providers
industrial, fire service,
utility
distributors and u.s.
government
 
 
  
 
 
bosch
draeger
ge
hubbell inc
mine safety
appliances
pelco
phillips
riken keiki
siemens
tyco
united technologies
3m
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
scanning and mobility
 
 
  
 
 
hand held and hands free 
image and laser based bar
code scanners
scan engines
mobile and wireless
computers
 
 
  
 
 
oems
retailers
distributors
commercial customers served
by the transportation and
and logistics, manufacturing,
healthcare and retail
 
 
  
 
 
datalogic
intermec
technologies
iridium vars
motorola solutions
psion 
skywave
 
 

5







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
satellite tracking hardware,
 
airtime services and
applications
search & rescue ground
stations and system 
software
lxe hand held and vehicle
mounts
 
 
  
 
 
channels
security, logistics,
maritime
customers for:
the tracking of vehicles, 
containers, ships, and 
personnel in remote
environments
national organizations that
monitor distress signals
from aircraft, ships and
individuals, typically military
branches and coast guards
warehousing and ports
 
 
  
 
 
tsi
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
process automation
products and solutions
 
 
  
 
 
advanced control software
and
industrial automation systems
for control and monitoring of
continuous, batch and hybrid
operations
production management
software
communications systems for
industrial control equipment 
and systems
consulting, networking
engineering and installation
terminal automation
solutions
process control
instrumentation
field instrumentation
analytical instrumentation
recorders and controllers
critical environment control
solutions and services
aftermarket maintenance,
repair and upgrade
gas control, measurement
and analyzing equipment
 
 
  
 
 
refining and petrochemical
companies
chemical manufacturers
oil and gas producers
food and beverage processors
pharmaceutical companies
utilities
film and coated producers
pulp and paper industry
continuous web producers in
the paper, plastics, metals,
rubber, non-woverns and
printing industries
mining and mineral
industries
 
 
  
 
 
abb
aspentech
emerson
invensys
siemens
yokogawa
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
building solutions and
services
 
 
  
 
 
hvac and building control
solutions and services
energy management solutions
and services, including
demand response and
automation
security and asset
management solutions and
services
enterprise building
integration
solutions
building information services
 
airport lighting and
systems,
visual docking guidance
systems
 
 
  
 
 
building managers and owners
 
contractors, architects and
developers
consulting engineers
security directors
plant managers
utilities
large global corporations
public school systems
universities
local governments
public housing agencies
airports
 
 
  
 
 
ameresco
chevron
groupmac
ingersoll rand
invensys
johnson controls
local contractors
and utilities
safegate
schneider
siemens
trane
thorn
united technologies
 
 

  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

6







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance
materials and technologies
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
our performance materials and technologies segment is a global leader
in providing customers with leading technologies and high-performance
materials, including hydrocarbon processing technologies, catalysts,
adsorbents, equipment and services, fluorine products, specialty films and
additives, advanced fibers and composites, intermediates, specialty
chemicals, electronic materials and chemicals.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
resins & chemicals
 
 
  
 
 
nylon 6 polymer
caprolactam
ammonium sulfate
phenol
acetone
cyclohexanone
meko
 
 
  
 
 
nylon for carpet fibers,
engineered resins and
flexible packaging
fertilizer ingredients
resins - phenolic, epoxy,
polycarbonate
sovents
chemical intermediates
paints, coatins, laquers
 
 
  
 
 
basf
dsm
sinopec
ube
ineos
mitsui
shell
polimeri 
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
hydrofluoric acid (hf)
 
 
  
 
 
anhydrous and aqueous 
hydrofluoric acid
  
 
 
  
 
 
fluorocarbons
metals processing
oil refining
chemical intermediates
semiconductors photovoltaics
 
 
  
 
 
mexichem fluor
solvay
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
fluorocarbons
 
 
  
 
 
refrigerants, aerosol and
insulation foam blowing
agents
genesolv®solvents
oxyfume sterilant gases
ennovate 3000 blowing agent
 
for refrigeration insulation
 
 
  
 
 
refrigeration
air conditioning
polyurethane foam
precision cleaning
optical
appliances
hospitals
medical equipment
manufacturers
 
 
  
 
 
arkema
dupont
solvay
mexichem fluor
daikin
sinochem
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
nuclear services
 
 
  
 
 
uf6 conversion services
 
 
  
 
 
nuclear fuel
electric utilities
 
 
  
 
 
cameco
comurhex
rosatom
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
research and fine
chemicals
 
 
  
 
 
oxime-based fine chemicals
fluoroaromatics
high-purity solvents
 
 
  
 
 
agrichemicals
biotech
 
 
  
 
 
avecia
degussa
dsm
e. merck
thermo fisher 
scientific
lonza
sigma-aldrich
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
performance
chemicals
imaging
chemicals
chemical processing
sealants
 
 
  
 
 
hf
derivatives
fluoroaromatics
catalysts
oxime-silanes
 
 
  
 
 
diverse by product type
 
 
  
 
 
atotech
basf
dsm
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
advanced fibers &
 
 
  
 
 
high modulus polyethylene
 
 
  
 
 
bullet resistant vests,
helmets
 
 
  
 
 
dupont
 
 

7







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
composites
 
 
  
 
 
fiber and shield composites
aramid shield composites
 
 
  
 
 
and other armor applications
 
cut-resistant
gloves
rope & cordage
 
 
  
 
 
dsm
teijin
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
healthcare and packaging
 
 
  
 
 
cast nylon film
bi-axially oriented nylon
film
fluoropolymer film
 
 
  
 
 
food and pharmaceutical
packaging
 
 
  
 
 
american biaxis
cfp
daikin
kolon
unitika
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
specialty additives
 
 
  
 
 
polyethylene waxes
paraffin waxes and blends
pvc lubricant systems
processing aids
luminescent pigments
adhesives
 
 
  
 
 
coatings and inks
pvc pipe, siding &
profiles
plastics
reflective coatings
safety & security
applications
 
 
  
 
 
basf
clariant
westlake
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
electronic chemicals 
 
 
  
 
 
ultra high-purity hf
inorganic acids
hi-purity solvents
 
 
  
 
 
semiconductors
photovoltaics
 
 
  
 
 
kmg
basf
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
semiconductor materials
and services
 
 
  
 
 
interconnect-dielectrics
interconnect-metals
semiconductor packaging
materials
advanced polymers
anti-reflective coatings
thermo-couples
 
 
  
 
 
semiconductors
microelectronics
telecommunications
led
photovoltaics
 
 
  
 
 
basf
brewer
dow
nikko
praxair
shinko
tosoh
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
catalysts, adsorbents and
specialties
 
 
  
 
 
catalysts
molecular sieves
adsorbents
customer catalyst
manufacturing
 
 
  
 
 
petroleum, refining,
petrochemical, gas
processing, and
manufacturing industries
 
 
  
 
 
axens
basf
wr grace
haldor
shell/criterion
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
process technology
and equipment
 
 
  
 
 
technology licensing and
engineering design of
process units and systems
engineered products
proprietary equipment
training and development of
technical personnel
gas processing technology
 
 
  
 
 
petroleum refining,
petrochemical and gas
processing
 
 
  
 
 
axens
bp/amoco
exxon-mobil
chevron lummus
global
chicago bridge & 
iron
koch glitsch
linde ag
natco
shaw group
shell/sgs
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
renewable fuels and
chemicals
 
 
  
 
 
technology licensing of
process, catalysts,
absorbents,
refining equipment and
services for producing
renewable-based fuels
and chemicals
 
 
  
 
 
military, refining, fuel
oil,
power production
 
 
  
 
 
neste oy
lurgi
kior
syntroleum
dynamotive
 
 

  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

8







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation
systems
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
our transportation systems segment is one of the leading
manufacturers of engine boosting systems for passenger cars and commercial
vehicles, as well as a leading provider of braking products.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product/service classes
 
 
  
 
 
major products/services
 
 
  
 
 
major customers/uses
 
 
  
 
 
key competitors
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
charge-air systems
 
 
  
 
 
turbochargers for gasoline
and diesel engines
 
 
  
 
 
passenger car, truck and
off-highway oems
engine manufacturers
aftermarket distributors and
dealers
 
 
  
 
 
borg-warner
holset
ihi
mhi
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
thermal systems
 
 
  
 
 
exhaust gas coolers
charge-air coolers
aluminum radiators
aluminum cooling modules
 
 
  
 
 
passenger car, truck and
off-highway oems
engine manufacturers
aftermarket distributors and
dealers
 
 
  
 
 
behr
modine
valeo
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
brake hard parts and other
friction materials
 
 
  
 
 
disc brake pads and shoes
drum brake linings
brake blocks
disc and drum brake
components
brake hydraulic components
brake fluid
aircraft brake linings
railway linings
 
 
  
 
 
automotive and heavy vehicle
oems, oes, brake 
manufacturers and
aftermarket channels
installers
railway and
commercial/military
aircraft oems and brake
manufacturers
 
 
  
 
 
advics
akebono
continental
federal-mogul
itt corp
jbi
nisshinbo
trw
 
 


aerospace sales

our sales to
aerospace customers were 31, 33, and 36 percent of our total sales in 2011,
2010 and 2009, respectively. our sales to commercial aerospace original
equipment manufacturers were 6, 6 and 7 percent of our total sales in 2011,
2010 and 2009, respectively. in addition, our sales to commercial aftermarket
customers of aerospace products and services were 11 percent of our total sales
in each of 2011, 2010 and 2009. our aerospace results of operations can be
impacted by various industry and economic conditions. see “item 1a. risk
factors.”

u.s. government sales

sales to the
u.s. government (principally by our aerospace segment), acting through its
various departments and agencies and through prime contractors, amounted to
$4,276, $4,354 and $4,288 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, which
included sales to the u.s. department of defense, as a prime contractor and
subcontractor, of $3,374, $3,500 and $3,455 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively. base u.s. defense spending (excludes overseas contingent
operations) was essentially flat in 2011 compared to 2010. although we expect a
slight decline in our defense and space revenue in 2012 (see item 7 management’s
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations), we
do not expect our overall operating results to be significantly affected by any
proposed changes in 2012 federal defense spending due principally to the varied
mix of the government programs which impact us (oem production, engineering
development programs, aftermarket spares and repairs and overhaul programs) as
well as our diversified commercial businesses. our contracts with the u.s.
government are subject to audits, investigations, and termination by the
government. see “item 1a. risk factors.” 

backlog

9




our total
backlog at december 31, 2011 and 2010 was $16,160 and $14,616 million,
respectively. we anticipate that approximately $12,018 million of the 2011 backlog
will be filled in 2012. we believe that backlog is not necessarily a reliable
indicator of our future sales because a substantial portion of the orders
constituting this backlog may be canceled at the customer’s option.

competition

we are subject
to active competition in substantially all product and service areas.
competition is expected to continue in all geographic regions. competitive
conditions vary widely among the thousands of products and services provided by
us, and vary by country. our businesses compete on a variety of factors, such
as price, quality, reliability, delivery, customer service, performance,
applied technology, product innovation and product recognition. brand identity,
service to customers and quality are important competitive factors for our
products and services, and there is considerable price competition. other
competitive factors include breadth of product line, research and development
efforts and technical and managerial capability. while our competitive position
varies among our products and services, we believe we are a significant
competitor in each of our major product and service classes. a number of our
products and services are sold in competition with those of a large number of
other companies, some of which have substantial financial resources and
significant technological capabilities. in addition, some of our products
compete with the captive component divisions of original equipment
manufacturers. see item 1a “risk factors” for further discussion.

international operations

we are
engaged in manufacturing, sales, service and research and development globally.
u.s. exports and foreign manufactured products are significant to our
operations. u.s. exports comprised 12, 11 and 12 percent of our total sales in
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. foreign manufactured products and services,
mainly in europe and asia, were 43, 42 and 40 percent of our total sales in
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

approximately
18 percent of total 2011 sales of aerospace-related products and services were
exports of u.s. manufactured products and systems and performance of services
such as aircraft repair and overhaul. exports were principally made to europe,
asia, canada, and latin america. foreign manufactured products and systems and
performance of services comprised approximately 15 percent of total 2011
aerospace sales. the principal manufacturing facilities outside the u.s. are in
europe, with less significant operations in canada and asia.

approximately
3 percent of total 2011 sales of automation and control solutions products and
services were exports of u.s. manufactured products. foreign manufactured
products and performance of services accounted for 58 percent of total 2011
automation and control solutions sales. the principal manufacturing facilities
outside the u.s. are in europe and asia, with less significant operations in
canada and australia.

approximately
34 percent of total 2011 sales of performance materials and technologies products
and services were exports of u.s. manufactured products. exports were
principally made to asia and latin america. foreign manufactured products and
performance of services comprised 25 percent of total 2011 performance
materials and technologies sales. the principal manufacturing facilities
outside the u.s. are in europe, with less significant operations in asia.

approximately
3 percent of total 2011 sales of transportation systems products were exports
of u.s. manufactured products. foreign manufactured products accounted for 85
percent of total 2011 sales of transportation systems. the principal
manufacturing facilities outside the u.s. are in europe, with less significant
operations in asia and latin america.

financial
information including net sales and long-lived assets related to geographic
areas is included in note 24 of notes to financial statements in “item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data”. information regarding the
economic, political, regulatory and other risks associated with international
operations is included in “item 1a. risk factors.”

raw materials

the
principal raw materials used in our operations are generally readily available.
although we occasionally experience disruption in raw materials supply, we
experienced no significant problems in the purchase of key raw materials and
commodities in 2011. we are not dependent on any one supplier for a material 

10




amount of
our raw materials, except related to r240 (a key component in foam blowing
agents), a raw material used in our performance materials and technologies
segment. 

the costs of
certain key raw materials, including cumene, fluorspar, perchloroethylene,
r240, natural gas, sulfur and ethylene in our performance materials and
technologies business, nickel, steel and other metals in our transportation
systems business, and nickel, titanium and other metals in our aerospace
business, are expected to remain volatile. we will continue to attempt to
offset raw material cost increases with formula or long-term supply agreements,
price increases and hedging activities where feasible. we do not presently
anticipate that a shortage of raw materials will cause any material adverse
impacts during 2012. see “item 1a. risk factors” for further discussion.

patents, trademarks, licenses and
distribution rights

our
segments are not dependent upon any single patent or related group of patents,
or any licenses or distribution rights. we own, or are licensed under, a large
number of patents, patent applications and trademarks acquired over a period of
many years, which relate to many of our products or improvements to those
products and which are of importance to our business. from time to time, new
patents and trademarks are obtained, and patent and trademark licenses and
rights are acquired from others. we also have distribution rights of varying
terms for a number of products and services produced by other companies. in our
judgment, those rights are adequate for the conduct of our business. we believe
that, in the aggregate, the rights under our patents, trademarks and licenses
are generally important to our operations, but we do not consider any patent,
trademark or related group of patents, or any licensing or distribution rights related
to a specific process or product, to be of material importance in relation to
our total business. see “item 1a. risk factors” for further discussion.

we
have registered trademarks for a number of our products and services, including
honeywell, aclar, ademco, bendix, bw, callidus, enovate, esser, fire-lite,
garrett, genetron, gent, howard leight, jurid, matrikon, maxon, mk, north,
notifier, novar, rmg, silent knight, spectra, system sensor, trend, tridium and
uop. 

research and development

our
research activities are directed toward the discovery and development of new
products, technologies and processes, and the development of new uses for
existing products and software applications. the company’s principal research
and development activities are in the u.s., india, europe and china.

research
and development (r&d) expense totaled $1,799, $1,450 and $1,321 million in
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the increase in r&d expense of 24 percent in 2011
compared to 2010 was mainly due to increased expenditures on the development of
new technologies to support existing and new aircraft platforms in our
aerospace segment, the development of turbocharging systems for new diesel and
gas applications in our transportation systems segment and new product
development in our automation and control solutions segment. the increase in
r&d expense of 10 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 was mainly due to
additional product design and development costs in automation and control
solutions and increased expenditures on the development of products for new
aircraft platforms. r&d as a percentage of sales was 4.9, 4.5 and 4.4
percent in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. customer-sponsored (principally the
u.s. government) r&d activities amounted to an additional $867, $874 and
$852 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

environment

we
are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign government
requirements regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or
otherwise relating to the protection of the environment. it is our policy to
comply with these requirements, and we believe that, as a general matter, our
policies, practices and procedures are properly designed to prevent
unreasonable risk of environmental damage, and of resulting financial
liability, in connection with our business. some risk of environmental damage
is, however, inherent in some of our operations and products, as it is with
other companies engaged in similar businesses.

we
are and have been engaged in the handling, manufacture, use and disposal of
many substances classified as hazardous by one or more regulatory agencies. we
believe that, as a general matter, our policies, practices and procedures are
properly designed to prevent unreasonable risk of environmental damage and
personal injury, and that our handling, manufacture, use and disposal of these
substances are in accord with environmental and safety laws and regulations. it
is possible, however, that future knowledge or other developments, such as
improved capability to detect substances in the environment or increasingly
strict 

11




environmental laws and standards and
enforcement policies, could bring into question our current or past handling,
manufacture, use or disposal of these substances.

among
other environmental requirements, we are subject to the federal superfund and
similar state and foreign laws and regulations, under which we have been
designated as a potentially responsible party that may be liable for cleanup
costs associated with current and former operating sites and various hazardous
waste sites, some of which are on the u.s. environmental protection agency’s
superfund priority list. although, under some court interpretations of these
laws, there is a possibility that a responsible party might have to bear more
than its proportional share of the cleanup costs if it is unable to obtain
appropriate contribution from other responsible parties, we have not had to
bear significantly more than our proportional share in multi-party situations
taken as a whole.

we do not
believe that existing or pending climate change legislation, regulation, or
international treaties or accords are reasonably likely to have a material
effect in the foreseeable future on the company’s business or markets that it
serves, nor on its results of operations, capital expenditures or financial
position. we will continue to monitor emerging developments in this area.

further
information, including the current status of significant environmental matters
and the financial impact incurred for remediation of such environmental
matters, if any, is included in “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations,” in note 21 of notes to
financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data,”
and in “item 1a. risk factors.”

employees

we have
approximately 132,000 employees at december 31, 2011, of which approximately
53,000 were located in the united states.

12







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 1a.
 
 
risk factors
 
 


cautionary statement about forward-looking
statements

we
have described many of the trends and other factors that drive our business and
future results in “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations”, including the overview of the company and
each of our segments and the discussion of their respective economic and other
factors and areas of focus for 2012. these sections and other parts of this
report (including this item 1a) contain “forward-looking statements” within the
meaning of section 21e of the securities exchange act of 1934.

forward-looking
statements are those that address activities, events or developments that
management intends, expects, projects, believes or anticipates will or may
occur in the future. they are based on management’s assumptions and assessments
in light of past experience and trends, current economic and industry
conditions, expected future developments and other relevant factors. they are
not guarantees of future performance, and actual results, developments and
business decisions may differ significantly from those envisaged by our
forward-looking statements. we do not undertake to update or revise any of our
forward-looking statements. our forward-looking statements are also subject to
risks and uncertainties that can affect our performance in both the near-and
long-term. these forward-looking statements should be considered in light of
the information included in this form 10-k, including, in particular, the
factors discussed below.

risk factors

our
business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition are subject to
the risks and uncertainties set forth below, any one of which could cause our
actual results to vary materially from recent results or from our anticipated
future results.

industry and economic conditions may
adversely affect the market and operating conditions of our customers, which in
turn can affect demand for our products and services and our results of
operations.

the
operating results of our segments are impacted by general global industry and
economic conditions that can cause changes in spending and capital investment
patterns, demand for our products and services and the level of our
manufacturing and shipping costs. the operating results of our aerospace
segment, which generated 31 percent of our consolidated revenues in 2011, are
directly tied to cyclical industry and economic conditions, including global
demand for air travel as reflected in new aircraft production, the deferral or
cancellation of orders for new aircraft, delays in launch schedules for new
aircraft platforms, the retirement of aircraft, global flying hours, and
business and general aviation aircraft utilization rates, as well as changes in
customer buying patterns with respect to aftermarket parts, supplier
consolidation, factory transitions, capacity constraints, and the level and mix
of u.s. government appropriations for defense and space programs (as further discussed
in other risk factors below). the challenging operating environment faced by
the commercial airline industry may be influenced by a wide variety of factors
including global flying hours, aircraft fuel prices, labor issues, airline
consolidation, airline insolvencies, terrorism and safety concerns as well as
changes in regulations. future terrorist actions or pandemic health issues
could dramatically reduce both the demand for air travel and our aerospace
aftermarket sales and margins. the operating results of our automation and
control solutions (acs) segment, which generated 43 percent of our consolidated
revenues in 2011, are impacted by the level of global residential and
commercial construction (including retrofits and upgrades), capital spending and
operating expenditures on building and process automation, industrial plant
capacity utilization and expansion, inventory levels in distribution channels,
and global economic growth rates. performance materials and technologies’
operating results, which generated 15 percent of our consolidated revenues in
2011, are impacted by global economic growth rates, capacity utilization for
chemical, industrial, refining, petrochemical and semiconductor plants, our
customers’ availability of capital for refinery construction and expansion, and
raw material demand and supply volatility. transportation systems’ operating
results, which generated 11 percent of our consolidated revenues in 2011, are
impacted by global production and demand for automobiles and trucks equipped
with turbochargers, and regulatory changes regarding automobile and truck
emissions and fuel economy, delays in launch schedules for new automotive
platforms, and consumer demand and spending for automotive aftermarket
products. demand of global automotive and truck manufacturers will continue to
be influenced by a wide variety of factors, including ability of consumers to
obtain financing, ability to reduce operating costs and overall consumer and
business confidence. each of the segments is impacted by volatility in raw
material prices (as further described below) and non-material inflation.

raw material price fluctuations, the ability
of key suppliers to meet quality and delivery requirements, or catastrophic
events can increase the cost of our products and services, impact our ability
to meet commitments to customers, and cause us to incur significant
liabilities.

13



the cost of
raw materials is a key element in the cost of our products, particularly in our
performance materials and technologies (cumene, fluorspar,
perchloroethylene, r240, natural gas, sulfur and ethylene), transportation systems (nickel,
steel and other metals) and aerospace (nickel, titanium and other metals)
segments. our inability to offset material price inflation through increased
prices to customers, formula or long-term fixed price contracts with suppliers,
productivity actions or through commodity hedges could adversely affect our
results of operations.

our
manufacturing operations are also highly dependent upon the delivery of
materials (including raw materials) by outside suppliers and their assembly of
major components, and subsystems used in our products in a timely manner and in
full compliance with purchase order terms and conditions, quality standards,
and applicable laws and regulations. in addition, many major components,
product equipment items and raw materials are procured or subcontracted on a
single-source basis with a number of domestic and foreign companies; in some
circumstances these suppliers are the sole source of the component or
equipment. although we maintain a qualification and performance surveillance
process to control risk associated with such reliance on third parties and we
believe that sources of supply for raw materials and components are generally
adequate, it is difficult to predict what effects shortages or price increases
may have in the future. our ability to manage inventory and meet delivery
requirements may be constrained by our suppliers’ inability to scale production
and adjust delivery of long-lead time products during times of volatile demand.
our suppliers may fail to perform according to specifications as and when
required and we may be unable to identify alternate suppliers or to otherwise
mitigate the consequences of their non-performance. the supply chains for our
businesses could also be disrupted by suppliers’ decisions to exit certain
businesses, bankruptcy and by external events such as natural disasters,
extreme weather events, pandemic health issues, terrorist actions, labor
disputes, governmental actions and legislative or regulatory changes (e.g.,
product certification or stewardship requirements, sourcing restrictions,
product authenticity, climate change or greenhouse gas emission standards,
etc.). our inability to fill our supply needs would jeopardize our ability to
fulfill obligations under commercial and government contracts, which could, in
turn, result in reduced sales and profits, contract penalties or terminations,
and damage to customer relationships. transitions to new suppliers may result
in significant costs and delays, including those related to the required
recertification of parts obtained from new suppliers with our customers and/or
regulatory agencies. in addition, because our businesses cannot always
immediately adapt their cost structure to changing market conditions, our
manufacturing capacity for certain products may at times exceed or fall short
of our production requirements, which could adversely impact our operating
costs, profitability and customer and supplier relationships.

our
facilities, distribution systems and information technology systems are subject
to catastrophic loss due to, among other things, fire, flood, terrorism or
other natural or man-made disasters. if any of these facilities or systems were
to experience a catastrophic loss, it could disrupt our operations, result in
personal injury or property damage, damage relationships with our customers and
result in large expenses to repair or replace the facilities or systems, as
well as result in other liabilities and adverse impacts. the same risk can also
arise from the failure of critical systems supplied by honeywell to large
industrial, refining and petrochemical customers. 

our future growth is largely dependent upon
our ability to develop new technologies that achieve market acceptance with
acceptable margins.

our
businesses operate in global markets that are characterized by rapidly changing
technologies and evolving industry standards. accordingly, our future growth
rate depends upon a number of factors, including our ability to (i) identify
emerging technological trends in our target end-markets, (ii) develop and
maintain competitive products, (iii) enhance our products by adding innovative
features that differentiate our products from those of our competitors and
prevent commoditization of our products, (iv) develop, manufacture and bring
products to market quickly and cost-effectively, and (v) develop and retain
individuals with the requisite expertise.

our
ability to develop new products based on technological innovation can affect
our competitive position and requires the investment of significant resources.
these development efforts divert resources from other potential investments in
our businesses, and they may not lead to the development of new technologies or
products on a timely basis or that meet the needs of our customers as fully as
competitive offerings. in addition, the markets for our products may not
develop or grow as we currently anticipate. the failure of our technologies or
products to gain market acceptance due to more attractive offerings by our
competitors could significantly reduce our revenues and adversely affect our
competitive standing and prospects.

protecting
our intellectual property is critical to our innovation efforts. 

we own or
are licensed under a large number of u.s. and non-u.s. patents and patent
applications, trademarks and copyrights. our intellectual property rights may
expire or be challenged, invalidated or infringed 

14



upon by third parties or we may be unable to maintain, renew or enter
into new licenses of third party proprietary intellectual property on
commercially reasonable terms. in some non-u.s. countries, laws affecting intellectual
property are uncertain in their application, which can affect the scope or
enforceability of our patents and other intellectual property rights. any of
these events or factors could diminish or cause us to lose the competitive
advantages associated with our intellectual property, subject us to judgments,
penalties and significant litigation costs, and/or temporarily or permanently
disrupt our sales and marketing of the affected products or services.

cybersecurity
incidents could disrupt business operations, result in the loss of critical and
confidential information, and adversely impact our reputation and results of
operations.

global
cybersecurity threats can range from uncoordinated individual attempts to gain
unauthorized access to our information technology (it) systems to sophisticated
and targeted measures known as advanced persistent threats. while we employ
comprehensive measures to prevent, detect, address and mitigate these threats
(including access controls, data encryption, vulnerability assessments,
continuous monitoring of our it networks and systems and maintenance of backup
and protective systems), cybersecurity incidents, depending on their nature and
scope, could potentially result in the misappropriation, destruction, corruption
or unavailability of critical data and confidential or proprietary information
(our own or that of third parties) and the disruption of business operations.
the potential consequences of a material cybersecurity incident include
reputational damage, litigation with third parties, diminution in the value of
our investment in research, development and engineering, and increased
cybersecurity protection and remediation costs, which in turn could adversely
affect our competitiveness and results of operations.

an increasing percentage of our sales and
operations is in non-u.s. jurisdictions and is subject to the economic,
political, regulatory and other risks of international operations.

our
international operations, including u.s. exports, comprise a growing proportion
of our operating results. our strategy calls for increasing sales to and
operations in overseas markets, including developing markets such as china,
india, the middle east and other high growth regions.

in
2011, approximately 55 percent of our total sales (including products
manufactured in the u.s. and sold outside the u.s. as well as products
manufactured in international locations) were outside of the u.s. including
approximately 30 percent in europe and approximately 12 percent in asia. risks
related to international operations include exchange control regulations, wage
and price controls, employment regulations, foreign investment laws, import,
export and other trade restrictions (such as embargoes), changes in regulations
regarding transactions with state-owned enterprises, nationalization of private
enterprises, government instability, and our ability to hire and maintain
qualified staff and maintain the safety of our employees in these regions. we
are also subject to u.s. laws prohibiting companies from doing business in
certain countries, or restricting the type of business that may be conducted in
these countries. the cost of compliance with increasingly complex and often
conflicting regulations worldwide can also impair our flexibility in modifying
product, marketing, pricing or other strategies for growing our businesses, as
well as our ability to improve productivity and maintain acceptable operating
margins.

uncertain
global economic conditions arising from circumstances such as sovereign debt
issues and credit rating downgrades in certain european countries or
speculation regarding changes to the composition or viability of the euro zone
could result in reduced customer confidence resulting in decreased demand for
our products and services, disruption in payment patterns and higher default
rates, a tightening of credit markets (see risk factor below regarding
volatility of credit markets for further discussion), increased risk regarding
supplier performance, increased counterparty risk with respect to the financial
institutions with which we do business, and exchange rate fluctuations. while
we employ comprehensive controls regarding global cash management to guard
against cash or investment loss and to ensure our ability to fund our
operations and commitments, a material disruption to the financial institutions
with whom we transact business could expose honeywell to financial loss. 

sales
and purchases in currencies other than the us dollar expose us to fluctuations
in foreign currencies relative to the us dollar and may adversely affect our
results of operations. currency fluctuations may affect product demand and
prices we pay for materials, as a result, our operating margins may be negatively
impacted. fluctuations in exchange rates may give rise to translation gains or
losses when financial statements of our non-u.s. businesses are translated into
u.s. dollars. while we monitor our exchange rate exposures and seek to reduce
the risk of volatility through hedging activities, such activities bear a
financial cost and may not always be available to us or successful in
significantly mitigating such volatility. 

volatility of credit markets or
macro-economic factors could adversely affect our business.

15



changes
in u.s. and global financial and equity markets, including market disruptions,
limited liquidity, and interest rate volatility, may increase the cost of
financing as well as the risks of refinancing maturing debt. in addition, our
borrowing costs can be affected by short and long-term ratings assigned by
independent rating agencies. a decrease in these ratings could increase our
cost of borrowing.

delays
in our customers’ ability to obtain financing, or the unavailability of
financing to our customers, could adversely affect our results of operations
and cash flow. the inability of our suppliers to obtain financing could result
in the need to transition to alternate suppliers, which could result in
significant incremental cost and delay, as discussed above. lastly, disruptions
in the u.s. and global financial markets could impact the financial
institutions with which we do business.

we may be required to recognize impairment
charges for our long-lived assets or available for sale investments.

at
december 31, 2011, the net carrying value of long-lived assets (property, plant
and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets) and available for sale
securities totaled approximately $19.1 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively.
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, we periodically
assess these assets to determine if they are impaired. significant negative
industry or economic trends, disruptions to our business, unexpected
significant changes or planned changes in use of the assets, divestitures and
market capitalization declines may result in impairments to goodwill and other
long-lived assets. an other than temporary decline in the market value of our
available for sale securities may also result in an impairment charge. future
impairment charges could significantly affect our results of operations in the
periods recognized. impairment charges would also reduce our consolidated
shareowners’ equity and increase our debt-to-total-capitalization ratio, which
could negatively impact our credit rating and access to the public debt and
equity markets.

a change in the level of u.s. government
defense and space funding or the mix of programs to which such funding is
allocated could adversely impact aerospace’s defense and space sales and
results of operations.

sales
of our defense and space-related products and services are largely dependent
upon government budgets, particularly the u.s. defense budget. sales as a prime
contractor and subcontractor to the u.s. department of defense comprised
approximately 29 and 9 percent of aerospace and total sales, respectively, for
the year ended december 31, 2011. we cannot predict the extent to which total funding
and/or funding for individual programs will be included, increased or reduced
as part of the 2012 and subsequent budgets ultimately approved by congress, or
be included in the scope of separate supplemental appropriations. we also
cannot predict the impact of potential changes in priorities due to military
transformation and planning and/or the nature of war-related activity on
existing, follow-on or replacement programs. a shift in defense or space
spending to programs in which we do not participate and/or reductions in
funding for or termination of existing programs could adversely impact our
results of operations.

as a supplier of military and other equipment
to the u.s. government, we are subject to unusual risks, such as the right of
the u.s. government to terminate contracts for convenience and to conduct
audits and investigations of our operations and performance.

in
addition to normal business risks, companies like honeywell that supply
military and other equipment to the u.s. government are subject to unusual
risks, including dependence on congressional appropriations and administrative
allotment of funds, changes in governmental procurement legislation and
regulations and other policies that reflect military and political
developments, significant changes in contract requirements, complexity of
designs and the rapidity with which they become obsolete, necessity for
frequent design improvements, intense competition for u.s. government business
necessitating increases in time and investment for design and development,
difficulty of forecasting costs and schedules when bidding on developmental and
highly sophisticated technical work, and other factors characteristic of the
industry, such as contract award protests and delays in the timing of contract
approvals. changes are customary over the life of u.s. government contracts,
particularly development contracts, and generally result in adjustments to
contract prices and schedules.

our
contracts with the u.s. government are also subject to various government
audits. like many other government contractors, we have received audit reports
that recommend downward price adjustments to certain contracts or changes to
certain accounting systems or controls to comply with various government
regulations. when appropriate and prudent, we have made adjustments and paid
voluntary refunds in the past and may do so in the future.

u.s.
government contracts are subject to termination by the government, either for
the convenience of the government or for our failure to perform consistent with
the terms of the applicable contract. in the case of a termination for
convenience, we are typically entitled to reimbursement for our allowable costs
incurred, plus 

16



termination costs and a reasonable profit. if
a contract is terminated by the government for our failure to perform we could
be liable for reprocurement costs incurred by the government in acquiring
undelivered goods or services from another source and for other damages
suffered by the government as permitted under the contract.

we
are also subject to government investigations of business practices and
compliance with government procurement regulations. if, as a result of any such
investigation or other government investigations (including violations of
certain environmental or export laws), honeywell or one of its businesses were
found to have violated applicable law, it could be suspended from bidding on or
receiving awards of new government contracts, suspended from contract
performance pending the completion of legal proceedings and/or have its export
privileges suspended. the u.s. government also reserves the right to debar a
contractor from receiving new government contracts for fraudulent, criminal or
other egregious misconduct. debarment generally does not exceed three years.

our reputation
and ability to do business may be impacted by the improper conduct of
employees, agents or business partners.

we
cannot ensure that our extensive compliance controls, policies and procedures
will, in all instances, protect us from reckless or criminal acts committed by
our employees, agents or business partners that would violate the laws of the
jurisdictions in which the company operates, including laws governing payments
to government officials, competition and data privacy. any improper actions
could subject us to civil or criminal investigations, monetary and non-monetary
penalties and could adversely impact our ability to conduct business, results
of operations and reputation.

changes in
legislation or government regulations or policies can have a significant impact
on our results of operations.

the
sales and margins of each of our segments are directly impacted by government
regulations. safety and performance regulations (including mandates of the
federal aviation administration and other similar international regulatory
bodies requiring the installation of equipment on aircraft), product
certification requirements and government procurement practices can impact
aerospace sales, research and development expenditures, operating costs and
profitability. the demand for and cost of providing automation and control
solutions products, services and solutions can be impacted by fire, security,
safety, health care, environmental and energy efficiency standards and regulations.
performance materials and technologies’ results of operations can be affected
by environmental (e.g. government regulation of fluorocarbons), safety and
energy efficiency standards and regulations, while emissions and energy
efficiency standards and regulations can impact the demand for turbochargers in
our transportation systems segment. legislation or regulations regarding areas
such as labor and employment, employee benefit plans, tax, health, safety and
environmental matters, import, export and trade, intellectual property, product
certification, and product liability may impact the results of each of our
operating segments and our consolidated results.

completed
acquisitions may not perform as anticipated or be integrated as planned, and
divestitures may not occur as planned.

we
regularly review our portfolio of businesses and pursue growth through
acquisitions and seek to divest non-core businesses. we may not be able to
complete transactions on favorable terms, on a timely basis or at all. in
addition, our results of operations and cash flows may be adversely impacted by
(i) the failure of acquired businesses to meet or exceed expected returns, (ii)
the discovery of unanticipated issues or liabilities, (iii) the failure to
integrate acquired businesses into honeywell on schedule and/or to achieve
synergies in the planned amount or within the expected timeframe, (iv) the
inability to dispose of non-core assets and businesses on satisfactory terms
and conditions and within the expected timeframe, and (v) the degree of
protection provided by indemnities from sellers of acquired companies and the
obligations under indemnities provided to purchasers of our divested
businesses.

we cannot
predict with certainty the outcome of litigation matters, government
proceedings and other contingencies and uncertainties.

we
are subject to a number of lawsuits, investigations and disputes (some of which
involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of the conduct of our
business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government
contracts, product liability (including asbestos), prior acquisitions and
divestitures, employment, employee benefits plans, intellectual property,
import and export matters and environmental, health and safety matters.
resolution of these matters can be prolonged and costly, and the ultimate
results or judgments are uncertain due to the inherent uncertainty in
litigation and other proceedings. moreover, our potential liabilities are
subject to change over time due to new developments, changes in settlement
strategy or the impact of evidentiary requirements, and we may become subject
to or be required to pay damage awards or 

17



settlements that could have a material
adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and financial
condition. while we maintain insurance for certain risks, the amount of our
insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover the total amount of all insured
claims and liabilities. it also is not possible to obtain insurance to protect
against all our operational risks and liabilities. the incurrence of
significant liabilities for which there is no or insufficient insurance
coverage could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows,
liquidity and financial condition.

our operations and the prior operations of
predecessor companies expose us to the risk of material environmental
liabilities.

mainly
because of past operations and operations of predecessor companies, we are
subject to potentially material liabilities related to the remediation of
environmental hazards and to claims of personal injuries or property damages
that may be caused by hazardous substance releases and exposures. we have
incurred remedial response and voluntary clean-up costs for site contamination
and are a party to lawsuits and claims associated with environmental and safety
matters, including past production of products containing hazardous substances.
additional lawsuits, claims and costs involving environmental matters are likely
to continue to arise in the future. we are subject to various federal, state,
local and foreign government requirements regulating the discharge of materials
into the environment or otherwise relating to the protection of the
environment. these laws and regulations can impose substantial fines and
criminal sanctions for violations, and require installation of costly equipment
or operational changes to limit emissions and/or decrease the likelihood of
accidental hazardous substance releases. we incur, and expect to continue to
incur capital and operating costs to comply with these laws and regulations. in
addition, changes in laws, regulations and enforcement of policies, the
discovery of previously unknown contamination or new technology or information
related to individual sites, the establishment of stricter state or federal
toxicity standards with respect to certain contaminants, or the imposition of
new clean-up requirements or remedial techniques could require us to incur
costs in the future that would have a negative effect on our financial
condition or results of operations.

our expenses include significant costs
related to employee and retiree health benefits. 

with
approximately 132,000 employees, including approximately 53,000 in the u.s., our
expenses relating to employee health and retiree health benefits are
significant. in recent years, we have experienced significant increases in
certain of these costs, largely as a result of economic factors beyond our
control, in particular, ongoing increases in health care costs well in excess
of the rate of inflation. continued increasing health-care costs, legislative
or regulatory changes, and volatility in discount rates, as well as changes in
other assumptions used to calculate retiree health benefit expenses, may
adversely affect our financial position and results of operations.

risks related to our defined benefit pension
plans may adversely impact our results of operations and cash flow.

significant
changes in actual investment return on pension assets, discount rates, and
other factors could adversely affect our results of operations and pension
contributions in future periods. u.s. generally accepted accounting principles
require that we calculate income or expense for the plans using actuarial
valuations. these valuations reflect assumptions about financial markets and
interest rates, which may change based on economic conditions. funding
requirements for our u.s. pension plans may become more significant. however,
the ultimate amounts to be contributed are dependent upon, among other things,
interest rates, underlying asset returns and the impact of legislative or
regulatory changes related to pension funding obligations. for a discussion
regarding the significant assumptions used to estimate pension expense,
including discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan
assets, and how our financial statements can be affected by pension plan
accounting policies, see “critical accounting policies” included in “item 7.
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations.” 

additional tax expense or additional tax
exposures could affect our future profitability.

we
are subject to income taxes in both the united states and various non-u.s.
jurisdictions, and our domestic and international tax liabilities are dependent
upon the distribution of income among these different jurisdictions. in 2011,
our tax expense represented 18.3 percent of our income before tax, and includes
estimates of additional tax which may be incurred for tax exposures and
reflects various estimates and assumptions, including assessments of future
earnings of the company that could impact the valuation of our deferred tax
assets. our future results of operations could be adversely affected by changes
in the effective tax rate as a result of a change in the mix of earnings in
countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the overall
profitability of the company, changes in tax legislation and rates, changes in
generally accepted accounting principles, changes in the valuation of deferred
tax assets and liabilities, changes in the amount of earnings permanently 

18



reinvested offshore, the results of audits
and examinations of previously filed tax returns and continuing assessments of
our tax exposures. 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 1b.
 
 
unresolved staff comments
 
 


not
applicable


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 2.
 
 
properties
 
 

we
have approximately 1,300 locations consisting of plants, research laboratories,
sales offices and other facilities. our headquarters and administrative complex
is located in morris township, new jersey. our plants are generally located to
serve large marketing areas and to provide accessibility to raw materials and
labor pools. our properties are generally maintained in good operating
condition. utilization of these plants may vary with sales to customers and
other business conditions; however, no major operating facility is
significantly idle. we own or lease warehouses, railroad cars, barges,
automobiles, trucks, airplanes and materials handling and data processing
equipment. we also lease space for administrative and sales staffs. our
properties and equipment are in good operating condition and are adequate for
our present needs. we do not anticipate difficulty in renewing existing leases
as they expire or in finding alternative facilities.

our
principal plants, which are owned in fee unless otherwise indicated, are as
follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
anniston, al (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
olathe, ks
 
 
  
 
 
toronto, canada
 
 
 
 
glendale, az (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
minneapolis, mn (partially leased)
 
 
  
 
 
olomouc, czech republic (leased)
 
 
 
 
phoenix, az
 
 
  
 
 
plymouth, mn
 
 
  
 
 
raunheim, germany
 
 
 
 
tempe, az
 
 
  
 
 
rocky mount, nc
 
 
  
 
 
penang, malaysia
 
 
 
 
tucson, az
 
 
  
 
 
albuquerque, nm
 
 
  
 
 
chihuahua, mexico
 
 
 
 
torrance, ca
 
 
  
 
 
urbana, oh
 
 
  
 
 
singapore (leased)
 
 
 
 
clearwater, fl
 
 
  
 
 
greer, sc
 
 
  
 
 
yeovil, uk (leased)
 
 
 
 
south bend, in 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
automation
and control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
san diego, ca (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
pleasant prairie, wi (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
schonaich, germany (leased) 
 
 
 
 
northford, ct
 
 
  
 
 
shenzhen, china (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
pune, india (leased)
 
 
 
 
freeport, il
 
 
  
 
 
suzhou, china
 
 
  
 
 
chihuahua, mexico
 
 
 
 
st. charles, il (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
tianjin, china (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
juarez, mexico (partially leased)
 
 
 
 
golden valley, mn
 
 
  
 
 
brno, czech republic (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
tijuana, mexico (leased) 
 
 
 
 
york, pa (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
mosbach, germany
 
 
  
 
 
emmen, netherlands
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
neuss, germany
 
 
  
 
 
newhouse, scotland
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
performance
materials and technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mobile, al
 
 
  
 
 
shreveport, la
 
 
  
 
 
colonial heights, va
 
 
 
 
des plaines, il
 
 
  
 
 
frankford, pa
 
 
  
 
 
hopewell, va
 
 
 
 
metropolis, il
 
 
  
 
 
pottsville, pa
 
 
  
 
 
spokane, wa
 
 
 
 
baton rouge, la
 
 
  
 
 
orange, tx
 
 
  
 
 
seelze, germany
 
 
 
 
geismar, la
 
 
  
 
 
chesterfield, va
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
transportation systems 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
shanghai, china
 
 
  
 
 
atessa, italy
 
 
  
 
 
mexicali, mexico (partially leased)
 
 
 
 
glinde, germany
 
 
  
 
 
kodama, japan
 
 
  
 
 
bucharest, romania
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
ansan, korea (leased)
 
 
  
 
 
pune india
 
 

19







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 3.
 
 
legal proceedings
 
 

we are
subject to a number of lawsuits, investigations and claims (some of which
involve substantial amounts) arising out of the conduct of our business. see a
discussion of environmental, asbestos and other litigation matters in note 21
of notes to financial statements.

environmental
matters involving potential monetary sanctions in excess of $100,000 

although the
outcome of the matter discussed below cannot be predicted with certainty, we do
not believe that it will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated
financial position, consolidated results of operations or operating cash flows.

the united
states environmental protection agency and the united states department of
justice are investigating whether the company’s manufacturing facility in
hopewell, virginia is in compliance with the requirements of the clean air act
and the facility’s air operating permit. based on these investigations, the
federal authorities have issued notices of violation with respect to the
facility’s benzene waste operations, leak detection and repair program,
emissions of nitrogen oxides and emissions of particulate matter. the company
has entered into negotiations with federal authorities to resolve the alleged
violations. 

20



executive officers of the
registrant

the executive officers of honeywell, listed as follows, are elected
annually by the board of directors. there are no family relationships among
them.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
name, age,
date first elected an
executive officer
 
 
  
 
 
business experience
 
 
 
 
david m. cote, 59
2002(a)
 
 
  
 
 
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer since july 2002.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
alexandre ismail, 46
2009
 
 
  
 
 
president and chief
executive officer transportation systems since april 2009. president turbo
technologies from november 2008 to april 2009. president global passengers
vehicles from august 2006 to november 2008. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
roger fradin, 58
2004
 
 
  
 
 
president and chief
executive officer automation and control solutions since january 2004.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
timothy o. mahoney, 55
2009
 
 
  
 
 
president and chief
executive officer aerospace since september 2009. vice president aerospace
engineering and technology and chief technology officer from march 2007 to
august 2009. president of air transport and regional from july 2005 to march
2007. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
andreas c. kramvis, 59
2008
 
 
  
 
 
president and chief
executive officer performance materials and technologies since march 2008.
president of environmental and combustion controls from september 2002 to
february 2008.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
david j. anderson, 62
2003
 
 
  
 
 
senior vice president
and chief financial officer since june 2003.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
krishna mikkilineni, 52
2010
 
 
  
 
 
senior vice president
engineering and operations since april 2010 and president honeywell
technology solutions since january 2009. vice president honeywell technology
solutions from july 2002 to january 2009.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
katherine l. adams, 47
2009
 
 
  
 
 
senior vice president
and general counsel since april 2009. vice president and general counsel from
september 2008 to april 2009. vice president and general counsel for
performance materials and technologies from february 2005 to september 2008.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mark r. james, 50
2007
 
 
  
 
 
senior vice president
human resources and communications since november 2007. vice president of
human resources and communications for aerospace from october 2004 to
november 2007. 
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(a)
also a director.
 
 

21




part ii.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item
5.
 
 
market
for registrant’s common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
 
 

market
and dividend information for honeywell’s common stock is included in note 26 of
notes to financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and
supplementary data.”

the
number of record holders of our common stock at december 31, 2011 was 58,965.

honeywell
purchased 1,450,000 shares of its common stock, par value $1 per share, in the
quarter ending december 31, 2011. honeywell purchased a total of 20,250,000
shares of its common stock in 2011. under the company’s previously reported $3
billion share repurchase program, $1.9 billion remained available as of
december 31, 2011 for additional share repurchases. honeywell presently expects
to repurchase outstanding shares from time to time during 2012 to offset the
dilutive impact of employee stock based compensation plans, including future
option exercises, restricted unit vesting and matching contributions under our
savings plans. the amount and timing of future repurchases may vary depending
on market conditions and the level of operating, financing and other investing
activities. 

the
following table summarizes honeywell’s purchase of its common stock, par value
$1 per share, for the three months ended december 31, 2011:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
issuer
purchases of equity securities
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(a)
 
 
  
 
 
(b)
 
 
  
 
 
(c)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(d)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
period
 
 
  
 
 
total
number of
shares
purchased
 
 
  
 
 
average
price paid
per share
 
 
  
 
 
total number
of shares
purchased as
part of publicly
announced plans
or programs
 
 
  
 
 
approximate
dollar
value of shares that
may yet be purchased
under plans or
programs
(dollars in millions)
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
november 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,250,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$ 52.67
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,250,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$ 1,925
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
december 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
200,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$ 50.09
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
200,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$ 1,915
 
 
  
 
 

22



performance graph

the following graph compares the five-year cumulative total return on
our common stock to the total returns on the standard & poor’s 500 stock
index and a composite of standard & poor’s industrial conglomerates and
aerospace and defense indices, on a 60%/40% weighted basis, respectively (the
“composite index”). the weighting of the components of the composite index are
based on our segments’ relative contribution to total segment profit. the
selection of the industrial conglomerates component of the composite index
reflects the diverse and distinct range of non-aerospace businesses conducted
by honeywell. the annual changes for the five-year period shown in the graph
are based on the assumption that $100 had been invested in honeywell stock and
each index on december 31, 2006 and that all dividends were reinvested.




 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2006 
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2007 
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2008 
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2009 
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2010 
 
 
  
 
 
dec 2011 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
138.64
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
75.77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
93.82
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
130.89
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
137.22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
s&p 500 index®
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
105.49
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
66.46
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
84.05
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
96.71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
98.76
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
composite index
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
110.34
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60.12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
69.70
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
81.74
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
83.81
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

23



honeywell international inc.

the
consumer products group (cpg) automotive aftermarket business had historically
been part of the transportation systems reportable segment. in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, cpg is presented as discontinued
operations in all periods presented. see note 2 acquisitions and divestitures
for further details. this selected financial data should be read in conjunction
with honeywell’s consolidated financial statements and related notes included
elsewhere in this annual report as well as the section of this annual report
titled item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 6.
 
 
selected financial data
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2008
 
 
  
 
 
2007
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(dollars in
millions, except per share amounts)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
results of
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
35,520
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
33,462 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts attributable to
honeywell:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,944
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,492
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
789
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,535 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
56
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
17
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
59 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,548
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
806
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,594 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per common share 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
basic:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.99
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.07
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3.31 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.27
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.07
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.08 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.65
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.06
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.09
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3.39 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assuming dilution:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.35
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.49
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.98
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.06
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3.27 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.07
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.08 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.05
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.08
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3.35 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dividends per share
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.37
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.00 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
financial
position at year-end
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
property, plant and
equipment—net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,804
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,724
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,847
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,934
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,985 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39,808
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
37,834
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35,993
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35,570
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
33,805 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
674
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
889
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,361
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,510
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,238 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,881
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,755
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,246
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,865
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,419 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,555
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,644
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,607
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,375
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,657 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
shareowners’ equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,902
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,787
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,971
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,140
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,293 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
for the year ended december 31, 2011,
income from discontinued operations includes a $178 million, net of tax gain,
resulting from the sale of the cpg business which funded a portion of the
2011 repositioning actions.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
for the year ended december 31, 2008, net
income attributable to honeywell includes a $417 million, net of tax gain,
resulting from the sale of our consumables solutions business as well as a charge
of $465 million for environmental liabilities deemed probable and reasonably
estimable during 2008.
 
 

24







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 7.
 
 
management’s
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations 
 
 

(dollars in millions, except per share amounts)

the
following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations (“md&a”) is intended to help the reader understand
the results of operations and financial condition of honeywell international
inc. (“honeywell”) for the three years ended december 31, 2011. all references
to notes related to notes to the financial statements in “item 8-financial
statements and supplementary data”.

the consumer
products group (cpg) automotive aftermarket business had historically been part
of the transportation systems reportable segment. in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, cpg results are excluded from continuing
operations and are presented as discontinued operations in all periods presented.
see note 2 acquisitions and divestitures for further details.

consolidated results of operations

net
sales 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
% change compared with prior period
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

the change in net sales compared
to the prior year period is attributable to the following:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
versus
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010
versus
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
volume
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
price
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acquisitions/divestitures
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

a discussion of net sales by segment can be
found in the review of business segments section of this md&a.


cost of products and services sold 



 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
28,556
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
24,721
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
23,260
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
% change compared with prior period
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
gross margin percentage
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21.8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
23.6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22.3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

cost of
products and services sold increased by $3,835 million or 16 percent in 2011
compared with 2010 principally due to an estimated increase in direct material
costs, labor costs and indirect costs of approximately $2 billion, $520
million, and $280 million, respectively, driven substantially by a 13 percent
increase in sales as a result of the factors (excluding price) discussed above
and in the review of business segments section of this md&a, an increase in
pension and other postretirement expense of approximately $880 million
(primarily driven by the increase in the pension mark-to-market adjustment
allocated to cost of goods sold of $1.1 billion) and an increase in
repositioning and other charges of approximately $90 million.

gross margin
percentage decreased by 1.8 percentage points in 2011 compared with 2010
primarily due to higher pension and other postretirement expense (approximate
2.8 percentage point impact primarily driven by an unfavorable 3.3 percentage
point impact resulting from the increase in the pension mark-to-market
adjustment allocated to cost of goods sold) and repositioning and other charges
(approximate 0.2 percentage point impact), 

25




partially offset by higher sales
volume driven by each of our business segments (approximate 1.2 percentage
point impact).

cost of
products and services sold increased by $1,461 million or 6 percent in 2010
compared with 2009, principally due to an estimated increase in direct material
costs and indirect costs of approximately $1,250 million and $300 million,
respectively, driven substantially by an 8 percent increase in sales as a
result of the factors discussed above and in the review of business segments
section of this md&a and approximately $130 million increase in
repositioning and other charges (see note 3 of notes to financial statements),
partially offset by a $300 million decrease in pension expense. 

gross margin
percentage increased by 1.3 percentage points in 2010 compared with 2009,
primarily due to lower pension expense (approximate 1 percentage point impact)
and higher sales volume driven by our automation and control solutions segment,
performance materials and technologies segment and transportation systems
segment (approximate 0.7 percentage point impact), partially offset by higher
repositioning and other charges (approximate 0.5 percentage point impact).

selling, general
and administrative expenses


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and
administrative expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,399
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,618
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,323
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


  
 
 
 
 
percent of sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14.8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14.3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14.4
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

selling, general
and administrative expenses (sg&a) increased as a percentage of sales by
0.5 percent in 2011 compared to 2010 driven by an estimated $430 million
increase in labor costs resulting from acquisitions, investment for growth, and
merit increases, an estimated increase of $240 million in pension and other
postretirement expense (driven primarily by the allocated portion of the
pension mark-to-market charge increase of approximately $270 million) and an
estimated increase of $60 million in repositioning actions, partially offset by
the impact of higher sales volume as a result of the factors discussed in the
review of business segments section of this md&a.

selling,
general and administrative expenses (sg&a) decreased as a percentage of
sales by 0.1 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 driven by the impact of higher
sales volume, discussed above, and lower pension expense, partially offset by
an estimated $500 million increase in labor costs (reflecting the absence of
prior period labor cost actions).


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
(income) expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
equity (income)/loss of
affiliated companies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(51
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(28
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gain on sale of
non-strategic businesses and assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(61
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(87
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(58
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(39
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(33
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
50
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other, net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(42
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
47
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(84
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(97
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(54
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

other income
decreased by $13 million in 2011 compared to 2010 due primarily to a $29
million loss resulting from early redemption of debt in the first quarter of
2011, included within “other, net”, and the absence of a $62 million pre-tax
gain related to the consolidation of a joint venture within our performance
materials and technologies segment in the third quarter of 2010, included
within “other, net”, (see note 4 of notes to financial statements for further
details), partially offset by a $61 million increase in gain on sale of
non-strategic businesses and assets due primarily to a $50 million pre-tax gain
related to the divestiture of the automotive on-board sensors products business
within our automation and control solutions segment and the reduction of
approximately $12 million of acquisition related costs compared to 2010
included within “other, net”.

other income
increased by $43 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to the
consolidation of a joint venture resulting in a $62 million pre-tax gain within
our performance materials and technologies segment in the third quarter of
2010, included in “other, net” (see note 4 of notes to financial statements for
further details), 

26



the absence of an other-than-temporary impairment charge of$62 million in the second
quarter of 2009, included within “other, net”, partially offset by the absence
of a $50 million deconsolidation gain related to a subsidiary within our
automation and control solutions segment in 2009, included within “gain on sale
of non-strategic businesses and assets”, and $22 million of acquisition related
costs in 2010, included within “other, net”. 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest
and other financial charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest and other financial
charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
376
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
386
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
458
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
% change compared with prior
period
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(16
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 

interest and
other financial charges decreased by 3% percent in 2011 compared with 2010
primarily due to lower borrowing costs, partially offset by higher debt
balances.

interest and
other financial charges decreased by 16% percent in 2010 compared with 2009 due
to lower debt balances and lower borrowing costs.

tax expense 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
765
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
436
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
effective tax rate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18.3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28.1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22.2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

the
effective tax rate decreased by 9.8 percentage points in 2011 compared with
2010 primarily due to a change in the mix of earnings between u.s. and foreign
related to higher u.s. pension expense (primarily driven by an approixmate
7.6 percentage point impact which resulted from the increase in pension mark-to-market
expense), an increased benefit from manufacturing incentives, an increased
benefit from the favorable settlement of tax audits and an increased benefit
from a lower foreign effective tax rate. the foreign effective tax rate was
21.1 percent, a decrease of approximately 4.9 percentage points which primarily
consisted of (i) a 5.1 percent impact from decreased valuation allowances
on net operating losses primarily due to an increase in german earnings available
to be offset by net operating loss carry forwards, (ii) a 2.4 percent impact
from tax benefits related to foreign exchange and investment losses, iii)
a 1.2 percent impact from an increased benefit in tax credits and lower statutory
tax rates, and (iv) a 4.1 percent impact related to an increase in tax reserves.
the effective tax rate was lower than the u.s. statutory rate of 35 percent
primarily due to earnings taxed at lower foreign rates.

the
effective tax rate increased by 5.9 percentage points in 2010 compared with
2009 primarily due to a change in the mix of earnings related to lower u.s.
pension expense, the impact of an enacted change in the tax treatment of the
medicare part d program, the absence of manufacturing incentives, a decreased
impact from the settlement of audits and an increase in the foreign effective
tax rate. the foreign effective tax rate increased by approximately 7
percentage points which primarily consisted of i) a 6 percentage point impact
from the absence of tax benefits related to foreign exchange and investment
losses and ii) a (0.1) percentage points impact from increased valuation
allowances on net operating losses. the effective tax rate was lower than the
u.s. statutory rate of 35 percent primarily due to earnings taxed at lower
foreign rates.

in
2012, the effective tax rate could change based upon the company’s operating
results, mix of earnings and the outcome of tax positions taken regarding
previously filed tax returns currently under audit by various federal, state
and foreign tax authorities, several of which may be finalized in the
foreseeable future. the company believes that it has adequate reserves for
these matters, the outcome of which could materially impact the results of
operations and operating cash flows in the period they are resolved.

27





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
net income
attributable to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts attributable to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,944
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,492 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
56 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,548 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share of common stock –
assuming dilution
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.35
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.49
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1.98 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.07 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.05 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

earnings
per share of common stock – assuming dilution increased by $0.02 per share in
2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to an increase in segment profit in each
of our business segments, lower tax expense, the gain on disposal of
discontinued operations, and lower other postretirement expense, partially offset
by higher pension expense (primarily due to an increase in the pension
mark-to-market adjustment) and higher repositioning and other charges. 

earnings
per share of common stock – assuming dilution increased by $0.54 per share in
2010 compared with 2009 primarily due to increased segment profit in our
automation and control solutions, performance materials and technologies and
transportation systems segments and lower pension expense, partially offset by
higher tax expense and higher repositioning and other charges.

for
further discussion of segment results, see “review of business segments”.

business overview

this
business overview provides a summary of honeywell and its four reportable
operating segments (aerospace, automation and control solutions, performance
materials and technologies and transportation systems), including their
respective areas of focus for 2012 and the relevant economic and other factors
impacting their results, and a discussion of each segment’s results for the
three years ended december 31, 2011. each of these segments is comprised of
various product and service classes that serve multiple end markets. see note
23 to the financial statements for further information on our reportable
segments and our definition of segment profit.

economic and other factors 

in
addition to the factors listed below with respect to each of our operating
segments, our consolidated operating results are principally driven by:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
impact of change in global
economic growth rates (u.s., europe and emerging regions) and industry
conditions on demand in our key end markets;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
overall sales mix, in
particular the mix of aerospace original equipment and aftermarket sales and
the mix of automation and control solutions (acs) products, distribution and
services sales;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
the extent to which cost
savings from productivity actions are able to offset or exceed the impact of
material and non-material inflation;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
the impact of the pension
discount rate and asset returns on pension expense, including mark-to-market
adjustments, and funding requirements; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
the impact of fluctuations
in foreign currency exchange rates (euro and other global currencies),
relative to the u.s. dollar.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
areas of
focus for 2012 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the areas of focus for
2012, which are generally applicable to each of our operating segments,
include:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
driving profitable growth and margin
expansion by building innovative products that address customer needs;
 
 

28







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
achieving sales growth,
technological excellence and manufacturing capability and capacity through
global expansion, especially focused on emerging regions in china, india, the
middle east and other high growth regions;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
proactively managing raw
material costs through formula and long term supply agreements, price
increases and hedging activities, where feasible;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
driving cash flow
conversion through effective working capital management and capital
investment in our businesses, thereby enhancing liquidity, repayment of debt,
strategic acquisitions, and the ability to return value to shareholders;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
maintaining a flexible
cost structure to ensure our ability to proactively respond to trends in
short-cycle end markets such as the transportation systems turbo business, acs
energy, safety & security businesses, aerospace commercial after-market
and performance materials and technologies advanced materials business;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
aligning and prioritizing
investments in long-term growth considering short-term demand volatility;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
driving productivity
savings through execution of repositioning actions; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
controlling discretionary
spending levels with focus on non-customer related costs;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
utilizing our enablers honeywell operating system (hos), functional
transformation and velocity product development (vpd) to drive margin expansion by standardizing the way we work, reducing cycle
time, optimizing effectiveness of r&d, increasing quality and reducing the costs of product manufacturing, reducing costs and
enhancing the quality of our administrative functions and improving business operations through investments in systems and process
improvements;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
monitoring both suppliers
and customers for signs of liquidity constraints, limiting exposure to any
resulting inability to meet delivery commitments or pay amounts due, and
identifying alternate sources of supply as necessary; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
controlling
corporate costs, including costs incurred for asbestos and environmental
matters, pension and other post-retirement expenses and tax expense.
 
 

29




review of business segments


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,868
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,930
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,981
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,815
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,833
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,475
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,683
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,763
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,328
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,733
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,699
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,207
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,912
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,535
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,611
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,064
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,449
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,895
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
595
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
277
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
249
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,659
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,726
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,144
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,023
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,835
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,893
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,083
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,770
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,588
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,042
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
605
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
353
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
61
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(276
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(222
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(156
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,357
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,991
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

30



a reconciliation of segment profit to
consolidated income from continuing operations before taxes are as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,357
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,991
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other income/ (expense)(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
33
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
69
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest and other financial charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(376
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(386
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(458
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
stock compensation expense(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(168
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(163
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(117
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pension expense-ongoing(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(105
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(185
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(287
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pension mark-to-market adjustment(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,802
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(471
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(741
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
other postretirement income/(expense)(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
86
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(29
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
repositioning and other charges (2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(743
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(598
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(467
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations before taxes
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,722
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,964
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
equity income/(loss) of affiliated companies is included in segment
profit.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
amounts included in cost of products and services sold and selling,
general and administrative expenses.
 
 

31







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
% change
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2011
versus
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010
versus
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commercial:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
air transport and regional
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
original equipment
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,439
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,362
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,396
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aftermarket
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,828
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,437
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,419
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
business and general aviation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
original equipment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
723
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
513
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
709
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
41
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(28
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aftermarket
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,207
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
976
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
902
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
defense and space sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,278
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,395
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,337
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total aerospace sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,475
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,683
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,763
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
energy safety & security
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,977
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,789
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,932
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
17
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
process solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,678
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,507
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
building solutions &
distribution
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,548
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,172
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total automation and control
solutions sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,535
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,611
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
uop
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,931
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,556
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,574
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
advanced materials
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,728
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,170
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,570
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
23
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total performance materials
and technologies sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,659
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,726
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,144
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
turbo technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
31
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total transportation systems
sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


aerospace

overview

aerospace
is a leading global supplier of aircraft engines, avionics, and related
products and services for aircraft manufacturers, airlines, aircraft operators,
military services, and defense and space contractors. our aerospace products
and services include auxiliary power units, propulsion engines, environmental
control systems, electric power systems, engine controls, flight safety,
communications, navigation, radar and surveillance systems, aircraft lighting,
management and technical services, logistics services, advanced systems and
instruments, aircraft wheels and brakes and repair and overhaul services.
aerospace sells its products to original equipment (oe) manufacturers in the
air transport, regional, business and general aviation aircraft segments, and
provides spare parts and repair and maintenance services for the aftermarket
(principally to aircraft operators). the united states government is a major
customer for our defense and space products.

economic and other factors

aerospace
operating results are principally driven by:

32







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
new aircraft production rates and delivery schedules set by
commercial air transport, regional jet, business and general aviation oe
manufacturers, as well as airline profitability, platform mix and retirement
of aircraft from service;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global demand for commercial air travel as reflected in global flying
hours and utilization rates for corporate and general aviation aircraft, as
well as the demand for spare parts and maintenance and repair services for
aircraft currently in use;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
level and mix of u.s. government appropriations for defense and space
programs and military activity; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
changes in customer platform development schedules, requirements and
demands for new technologies; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
availability and price volatility of raw materials such as titanium
and other metals.
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11,475
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
10,683
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
10,763
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,665
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,099
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,099
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
591
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
553
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
570
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
196
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
196
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
201
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,023
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,835
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,893
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011 vs. 2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010 vs. 2009
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
factors contributing to year-over-year
change
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment
profit
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment
profit
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organic growth/ operational segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acquisitions and divestitures, net
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total % change
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


aerospace
sales by major customer end-markets were as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
% of
aerospace
sales
 
 
  
 
 
% change in 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
customer end-markets
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2011
versus
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010
versus
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commercial: 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
air transport and regional
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
original equipment
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aftermarket
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
23
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
business and general aviation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
original equipment
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
41
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(27
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aftermarket
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
defense and space
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total 
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
100
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


2011 compared with 2010

aerospace
sales increased by 7 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to an
increase in organic growth of 7 percent primarily due to increased commercial
sales volume. 

33







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
details regarding the changes in sales by customer end-markets are as
follows:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
air transport and regional original equipment (oe) sales increased by
6 percent in 2011 primarily driven by higher sales to our oe customers,
consistent with higher production rates, platform mix and a higher win rate
on selectables (components selected by purchasers of new aircraft). 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
air transport and regional aftermarket sales increased by 16 percent
for 2011 primarily due to (i) increased maintenance activity and spare parts sales driven by an approximately 6 percent increase
in global flying hours, (ii) increased sales of avionics upgrades, and (iii) changes in customer buying patterns relating to spare
parts and maintenance activity. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
business and general aviation oe sales increased by 41 percent in
2011 due to a rebound from near trough levels in 2010 and strong demand in
the business jet end market, favorable platform mix, growth from acquisitions
and lower oem payments (as defined below) during 2011. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
business and general aviation aftermarket sales increased by 24
percent in 2011 primarily due to increased sales of spare parts and revenue
associated with maintenance service agreements. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
defense and space sales decreased by 2 percent in 2011 primarily due
to anticipated program ramp downs, partially offset by higher domestic and
international aftermarket sales, increased unmanned aerial vehicle (uav)
shipments and the ems acquisition (refer to note 2). 
 
 

aerospace
segment profit increased by 10 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due
to an increase in operational segment profit of 9 percent and an increase of 1
percent due to lower oem payments made during 2011. the increase in operational
segment profit is comprised of the positive impact from higher commercial
aftermarket demand, price and productivity, net of inflation, partially offset
by research, development and engineering investments. cost of goods sold
totaled $8.7 billion in 2011, an increase of approximately $566 million from
2010 which is primarily a result of the factors discussed above.

2010
compared with 2009

aerospace
sales decreased by 1 percent in 2010 compared with 2009 primarily due to a 1
percent reduction of revenue related to amounts recognized for payments to
business and general aviation original equipment manufacturers to partially
offset their pre-production costs associated with new aircraft platforms (oem
payments). 

details
regarding the decrease in sales by customer end-markets are as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
air transport and regional original equipment (oe) sales decreased by
2 percent in 2010 primarily due to lower sales to our air transport oe
customers. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
air transport and regional aftermarket sales increased by 1 percent
in 2010 primarily due to increased sales of spare parts driven by the impact
of increased flying hours of approximately 6 percent in 2010. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
business and general aviation oe sales decreased by 27 percent in
2010 due to decreases in new business jet deliveries reflecting rescheduling
and cancellations of deliveries by oe customers in the first six months and
the impact of the oem payments discussed above. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
business and general aviation aftermarket sales increased by 8
percent in 2010 primarily due to increased sales of spare parts due to higher
engine utilization, partially offset by lower revenue associated with
licensing and maintenance service agreements. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
defense and space sales increased by 1 percent in 2010 primarily due
to higher sales of logistics services partially offset by program wind-downs
and completions and lower sales related to commercial helicopters. 
 
 

aerospace
segment profit decreased by 3 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to
a negative 3 percent impact from the oem payments, discussed above. operational
segment profit was flat in 2010 with the approximate positive 4 percent impact
from price and productivity, net of inflation (including the absence of prior
period labor cost actions offset by the benefits from prior repositioning
actions) offset by an approximate negative 4 percent impact from lower sales
volume. cost of goods sold totaled $8.1 billion in 2010, unchanged from 2009. 

34



2012 areas of focus

aerospace’s
primary areas of focus for 2012 include:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
driving customer satisfaction through operational excellence (product
quality, cycle time reduction, and supplier management);
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
aligning research and development and customer support costs with
customer requirements and demand for new platforms;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
expanding sales and operations in international locations;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global pursuit of new defense and space programs;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
focusing on cost structure initiatives to maintain profitability in
face of potential defense and space budget reductions and program specific appropriations;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continuing to design equipment that enhances the safety, performance
and durability of aerospace and defense equipment, while reducing weight and
operating costs; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continued deployment and optimization of our common enterprise
resource planning (erp) system.
 
 


automation and
control solutions (acs)

overview

acs
provides innovative products and solutions that make homes, buildings,
industrial sites and infrastructure more efficient, safe and comfortable. our
acs products and services include controls for heating, cooling, indoor air
quality, ventilation, humidification, lighting and home automation; advanced
software applications for home/building control and optimization; sensors,
switches, control systems and instruments for measuring pressure, air flow,
temperature and electrical current; security, fire and gas detection; personal
protection equipment; access control; video surveillance; remote patient
monitoring systems; products for automatic identification and data collection,
installation, maintenance and upgrades of systems that keep buildings safe,
comfortable and productive; and automation and control solutions for industrial
plants, including advanced software and automation systems that integrate,
control and monitor complex processes in many types of industrial settings as
well as equipment that controls, measures and analyzes natural gas production
and transportation.

in
2011, we changed our presentation of acs’s segment sales to better represent
the key markets served (energy, safety & security; process solutions;
building solutions & distribution). prior period disclosure below has been
conformed to this presentation format. 

economic and other factors

acs’s
operating results are principally driven by:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global commercial construction (including retrofits and upgrades);
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
demand for residential security and environmental control retrofits
and upgrades;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
demand for energy efficient products and solutions;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
industrial production;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
government and public sector spending;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
economic conditions and growth rates in developed (u.s. and europe)
and emerging markets;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
the strength of global capital and operating spending on process (including
petrochemical and refining) and building automation; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
inventory levels in distribution channels; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
changes to energy, fire, security, health care, safety and
environmental concerns and regulations.
 
 

35







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and
control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15,535
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
13,749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,611
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,448
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,312
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,561
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,819
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,480
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,256
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
185
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
187
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
206
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,083
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,770
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,588
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011 vs. 2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010 vs. 2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
factors contributing to year-over-year
change
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment
profit
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment
profit
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organic growth/ operational segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acquisitions and divestitures, net
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total % change
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


2011 compared with 2010

automation
and control solutions (“acs”) sales increased by 13 percent in 2011 compared
with 2010, primarily due to a 6 percent growth from acquisitions, net of
divestitures, 5 percent increase in organic revenue driven by increased sales
volume and higher prices and 2 percent favorable impact of foreign exchange
through the first nine months partially offset by the negative impact of
foreign exchange in the fourth quarter. we expect sales growth to continue to
moderate in the first quarter of 2012 due to european economic conditions and
the anticipated negative impact of foreign exchange. 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in our energy, safety & security businesses increased by 17
percent (6 percent organically) in 2011 principally due to (i) the positive
impact of acquisitions (most significantly sperian and ems), net of
divestitures (ii) higher sales volume due to general industrial recovery and
new product introductions and (iii) the favorable impact of foreign exchange.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in our process solutions increased 12 percent (6 percent
organically) in 2011 principally due to (i) increased volume reflecting
conversion to sales from backlog (ii) the favorable impact of foreign
exchange and (iii) the impact of acquisitions. orders increased in 2011
compared to 2010 primarily driven by continued favorable macro trends in oil
and gas infrastructure projects, growth in emerging regions and the positive
impact of foreign exchange. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in our building solutions & distribution increased by 6
percent (4 percent organically) in 2011 driven principally due to (i) volume
growth in our building solutions business reflecting conversion to sales from
order backlog and increased sales volume in our distribution business (ii)
the favorable impact of foreign exchange and (iii) the impact of
acquisitions, net of divestitures. 
 
 

acs
segment profit increased by 18 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 due to a 9
percent increase in operational segment profit, 6 percent increase from
acquisitions, net of divestitures and 3 percent positive impact of foreign
exchange. the increase in operational segment profit is comprised of an
approximate 5 percent positive impact from price and productivity, net of
inflation and investment for growth and a 4 percent positive impact from higher
sales volumes. cost of goods sold totaled $10.4 billion in 2011, an increase of
approximately $1.1 billion which is primarily due to acquisitions, net of
divestitures, higher sales volume, foreign exchange and inflation partially
offset by positive impact from productivity. 

2010 compared with 2009

acs
sales increased by 9 percent in 2010 compared with 2009, primarily due to a 6
percent increase in organic revenue driven by increased sales volume and 3
percent growth from acquisitions.

36







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in our energy, safety & security businesses increased by 14
percent in 2010 primarily reflecting higher sales volumes in our businesses
tied to industrial production (environmental and combustion controls, sensing
and control, gas detection, personal protective equipment and scanning and
mobility products), new product introductions and acquisitions, primarily
sperian. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in process solutions increased 7 percent in 2010 primarily due
to the positive impact of increased volume, acquisitions (primarily the rmg
group), higher prices and industrial field solutions driven by order growth
and conversion to sales from order backlog.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sales in building solutions & distribution increased by 3 percent
in 2010 driven primarily by energy efficiency projects and conversion to
sales from order backlog.
 
 

acs
segment profit increased by 11 percent in 2010 compared with 2009 due to a 9
percent increase in operational segment profit and 2 percent increase from
acquisitions. the increase in operational segment profit is comprised of an
approximate 18 percent positive impact from higher sales volume, partially
offset by an approximate 9 percent negative impact from inflation, net of price
and productivity (including the absence of prior period labor cost actions,
partially offset by the benefits of prior repositioning). cost of goods sold
totaled $9.3 billion in 2010, an increase of approximately $750 million which
is primarily as a result of the factors discussed above.

2012 areas of focus

acs’s
primary areas of focus for 2012 include:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
products and solutions for energy efficiency and asset management;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
extending technology leadership: lowest total installed cost and
integrated product solutions;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
defending and extending our installed base through customer
productivity and globalization;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sustaining strong brand recognition through our brand and channel
management;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continued centralization and standardization of global software
development capabilities;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continuing to identify, execute and integrate acquisitions in or adjacent
to the markets which we serve;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continuing to establish and grow emerging markets presence and
capability; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continuing to invest in new product development and introductions; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continued deployment and optimization of our common erp system; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
increased focus on commercial and r&d effectiveness. 
 
 


performance materials
and technologies (pmt)

overview

during the
fourth quarter of 2011, the specialty materials segment was renamed to
performance materials and technologies (‘pmt’). pmt better reflects the
businesses’ expanded set of technology and product offerings that reach far
beyond the traditional scope associated with specialty materials. 

performance
materials and technologies develops and manufactures high-purity, high-quality
and high-performance chemicals and materials for applications in the refining,
petrochemical, automotive, healthcare, agricultural, packaging, refrigeration,
appliance, housing, semiconductor, wax and adhesives segments. performance
materials and technologies also provides process technology, products and
services for the petroleum refining, gas processing, petrochemical, renewable
energy and other industries. performance materials and technologies’ product
portfolio includes fluorocarbons, hydrofluoroolefins, caprolactam, resins,
ammonium sulfate for fertilizer, phenol, specialty films, waxes, additives,
advanced fibers, customized research chemicals and intermediates, electronic
materials and chemicals, catalysts, and adsorbents.

37





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
economic
and other factors
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
performance
materials and technologies operating results are principally driven by:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
level and timing
of capital spending and capacity and utilization rates in refining and
petrochemical end markets;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
pricing volatility
and industry supply conditions for raw materials such as cumene, fluorspar,
perchloroethylene, r240, natural gas, sulfur and ethylene;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
impact of
environmental and energy efficiency regulations;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
extent of change
in order rates from global semiconductor customers;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global demand for
non-ozone depleting hydro fluorocarbons (hfcs);
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
condition of the
u.s. residential housing and non residential industries and automotive
demand;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global demand for
caprolactam and ammonium sulfate; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
demand for new
products including renewable energy and biofuels.
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,659
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,726
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,144
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,151
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,554
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,127
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
420
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
345
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
345
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
46
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
67
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,042
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
749
 
 
  
 
 
39
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
605
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011 vs. 2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010 vs. 2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
factors contributing to year-over-year
change
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment 
profit
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment 
profit
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organic growth/ operational segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acquisitions and divestitures, net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total % change
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  



 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
compared with 2010
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pmt
sales increased by 20 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 due to a 16 percent
increase in organic growth, 3 percent growth from acquisitions, and a 1
percent favorable impact of foreign exchange.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
advanced materials
sales increased by 18 percent (12 percent organically) in 2011 compared to
2010 primarily driven by (i) a 33 percent (18 percent organically) increase
in resins and chemicals sales primarily due to higher prices driven by strong
asia demand, agricultural demand, formula pricing arrangements and increased
sales resulting from the acquisition of a phenol plant, partially offset by
decreased volumes primarily due to disruptions in phenol supply and weather
related events, (ii) a 10 percent increase in our fluorine products business
due to higher pricing reflecting robust global demand and tight industry
supply conditions primarily in the first half of the year, which moderated in
the second half of the year due to seasonally weaker demand and increased
available capacity in the marketplace, (iii) a 12 percent increase in
specialty products sales primarily due to higher sales volume in our armor,
additives, and healthcare packaging products, and commercial excellence initiatives.
we expect advanced materials sales growth to continue to moderate during the
first half of 2012 due to slowing global demand and lower prices resulting
from increased availability of refrigerants supply. 
 
 

38







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
•
 
 
uop sales
increased by 24 percent in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily driven by
increased service, and licensing revenues and higher unit sales of refining
and specialty catalysts, primarily reflecting continued strength in the
refining and petrochemical industries. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pmt
segment profit increased by 39 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 due to a 38
percent increase in operational segment profit and a 1 percent favorable
impact of foreign exchange. the increase in operational segment profit is
primarily due to the favorable price to raw materials spread in resins and
chemicals and fluorine products and higher service, product and licensing
revenues in uop, partially offset by continued investment in growth and plant
optimization initiatives. cost of goods sold totaled $4.2 billion in 2011, an
increase of approximately $597 million which is primarily due to volume,
material inflation, the phenol plant acquisition and continued investment in
growth initiatives.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2010
compared with 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
pmt sales
increased by 14 percent in 2010 compared with 2009 predominantly due to
organic growth.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
•
 
 
advanced materials
sales increased by 23 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily driven by
(i) a 29 percent increase in resins and chemicals sales primarily due to
higher prices driven by strong asia demand, formula pricing arrangements and
agricultural demand, (ii) a 21 percent increase in specialty products sales
most significantly due to higher sales volume to our semiconductor, specialty
additives, advanced fiber industrial applications and specialty chemicals
customers, (iii) a 19 percent increase in our fluorine products business due
to higher sales volume from increased demand for our refrigerants, insulating
materials and industrial processing aids. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
•
 
 
uop sales
decreased by 1 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily driven by lower new
unit catalyst sales and timing of projects activity in the refining and
petrochemical industries, partially offset by increased gas processing
equipment sales. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pmt
segment profit increased by 24 percent in 2010 compared with 2009 due to a 25
percent increase in operational segment profit. the increase in operational
segment profit is primarily due to a 24 percent positive impact from higher
sales volumes. the positive impact from price and productivity was offset by
the negative impact from inflation (including the absence of prior period
labor cost actions). cost of goods sold totaled $3.6 billion in 2010, an
increase of approximately $400 million which is primarily as a result of the
factors discussed above.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2012
areas of focus
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
performance
materials and technologies primary areas of focus for 2012 include:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
continuing to
develop new processes, products and technologies that address energy
efficiency, the environment and security, as well as position the portfolio
for higher value;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
commercializing
new products and technologies in the petrochemical, gas processing and
refining industries and renewable energy sector;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
investing to
increase plant capacity and reliability and improving productivity and
quality through operational excellence;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
driving sales and
marketing excellence and expanding local presence in fast growing emerging
markets; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
managing exposure
to raw material price and supply fluctuations through evaluation of
alternative sources of supply and contractual arrangements.
 
 

39







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation
systems
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
overview
 
 

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation
systems provides automotive products that improve the performance and efficiency
of cars, trucks, and other vehicles through state-of-the-art technologies,
world class brands and global solutions to customers’ needs. transportation
systems’ products include turbochargers and thermal systems; and friction
materials (bendix(r) and jurid(r)) and brake hard parts. transportation
systems sells its products to original equipment (“oe”) automotive and truck
manufacturers (e.g., bmw, caterpillar, daimler, renault, ford, and
volkswagen), wholesalers and distributors and through the retail aftermarket.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
economic
and other factors
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
transportation
systems operating results are principally driven by:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
financial strength
and stability of automotive oe manufacturers;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global demand,
particularly in western europe, for automobile and truck production;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
turbo penetration
rates for new engine platforms;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
global consumer
preferences, particularly in western europe, for boosted diesel passenger
cars;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
degree of
volatility in raw material prices, including nickel and steel;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
new automobile
production rates and the impact of inventory levels of automotive oe
manufacturers on demand for our products;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
regulations
mandating lower emissions and improved fuel economy; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
consumers’ ability
to obtain financing for new vehicle purchases; and 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
impact of factors
such as consumer confidence on automotive aftermarket demand.
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
change
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,859  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,192  
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,432  
 
 
  
 
 
31
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,174  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,641  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,190  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
161  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
149  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
141  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
49  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  



 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
485  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
353  
 
 
  
 
 
37
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
61  
 
 
  
 
 
479
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011 vs. 2010
 
 
  
 
 
2010 vs. 2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
factors contributing to year-over-year
change
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment 
profit
 
 
  
 
 
sales
 
 
  
 
 
segment 
profit
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
organic growth/ operational segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
32
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
33
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
490
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
(11
 
 
)%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total % change
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
37
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
31
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
479
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


2011
compared with 2010

transportation
systems sales increased by 21 percent in 2011 compared with the 2010 primarily
due to a 16 percent increase in organic revenue driven by increased sales
volume and a favorable impact of foreign exchange of 5 percent. 

40




the sales
increase in 2011 as compared with 2010 was primarily driven by (i) increased
turbocharger sales to both light vehicle and commercial vehicle engine
manufacturers primarily due to new platform launches and strong diesel
penetration rates in western europe and (ii) the favorable impact of foreign
exchange. we expect turbocharger year over year sales growth rate to moderate
in the first quarter of 2012 primarily due to reduced european light vehicle
production and the anticipated negative impact of foreign exchange. 

transportation
systems segment profit increased by 37 percent in 2011 compared with 2010 due
to a 32 percent increase in operational segment profit and a 5 percent
favorable impact of foreign exchange. the increase in operational segment
profit is comprised of an approximate 25 percent positive impact from
productivity, net of inflation and price, and 7 percent positive impact from
higher sales volumes. cost of goods sold totaled $3.2 billion in 2011, an
increase of $533 million which is primarily a result of higher sales volume,
foreign exchange and inflation, partially offset by positive impact from
productivity. 

2010 compared with 2009

transportation
systems sales increased by 31 percent in 2010 compared with the 2009, primarily
due to a 33 percent increase in organic revenue driven by increased sales
volume, partially offset by an unfavorable impact of foreign exchange of 2
percent.

the sales
increase in 2010 as compared with 2009 was primarily due to increased turbocharger
sales to both light vehicle and commercial vehicle engine manufacturers
partially offset by the negative impacts of foreign exchange. 

transportation
systems segment profit increased by $292 million in 2010 compared with 2009
predominantly due to the positive impact from increased sales volume. cost of
goods sold totaled $2.6 billion in 2010, an increase of approximately $450
million which is also primarily a result of increased sales volume. 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2012
areas of focus
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
transportation
systems primary areas of focus in 2012 include:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
sustaining
superior turbocharger technology through successful platform launches;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
maintaining the
high quality of current products while executing new product introductions;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
increasing global
penetration and share of diesel and gasoline turbocharger oem demand;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
addressing
capacity challenges and improving cost structure through increasing plant
productivity and expansion of global manufacturing footprint;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
aligning cost
structure with current economic outlook, and successful execution of
repositioning actions; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
aligning
development efforts and costs with new turbo platform launch schedules.
 
 


repositioning and other charges

see note 3
to the financial statements for a discussion of repositioning and other charges
incurred in 2011, 2010, and 2009. our repositioning actions are expected to
generate incremental pretax savings of approximately $150 million in 2012
compared with 2011 principally from planned workforce reductions. cash
expenditures for severance and other exit costs necessary to execute our
repositioning actions were $159, $147, and $193 million in 2011, 2010, and
2009, respectively. such expenditures for severance and other exit costs have
been funded principally through operating cash flows. cash expenditures for
severance and other costs necessary to execute the remaining actions are
expected to be approximately $150 million in 2012 and will be funded through
operating cash flows.

the
following tables provide details of the pretax impact of total net
repositioning and other charges by segment.

41









 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended
december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





aerospace


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




net repositioning charge


 


$


 


29


 


 


$


 


32


 


 


$



 


31


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended
december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





automation
and control solutions


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




net repositioning charge


 


$



 


191


 


 


$



 


79


 


 


$



 


70


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended
december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





performance
materials and technologies


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




net repositioning charge


 


$



 


41


 


 


$


 


18


 


 


$


 


9


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended
december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





transportation
systems


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




net repositioning charge


 


$


 


82


 


 


$



 


20


 


 


$



 


50


 




asbestos related litigation charges, net of insurance


 


 


 


146


 


 


 


 


158


 


 


 


 


112


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 




 


 


$



 


228


 


 


$



 


178


 


 


$



 


162


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended
december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





corporate


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




net repositioning charge


 


$



 


11


 


 


$



 


—


 


 


$



 


—


 




asbestos related litigation charges, net of insurance


 


 


 


3


 


 


 


 


17


 


 


 


 


43


 




probable and reasonably estimable environmental liabilities


 


 


 


240


 


 


 


 


212


 


 


 


 


145


 




other


 


 


 


—


 


 


 


 


62


 


 


 


 


7


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 




 


 


$



 


254


 


 


$



 


291


 


 


$



 


195


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





liquidity and capital
resources

the
company continues to manage its businesses to maximize operating cash flows as
the primary source of liquidity. in addition to our available cash and operating
cash flows, additional sources of liquidity include committed credit lines,
short-term debt from the commercial paper market, long-term borrowings, and
access to the public debt and equity markets, as well as the ability to sell
trade accounts receivables. we continue to balance our cash and financing uses
through investment in our existing core businesses, acquisition activity, share
repurchases and dividends.

cash flow summary 

our
cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in
the consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended 2011, 2010 and
2009, are summarized as follows:

42









 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





cash provided by (used for):


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




operating activities


 


$



 


2,833


 


 


$



 


4,203


 


 


$



 


3,946


 




investing activities


 


 


 


(611


)


 


 


 


(2,269


)


 


 


 


(1,133


)




financing activities


 


 


 


(1,114


)


 


 


 


(2,047


)


 


 


 


(2,152


)




effect of exchange rate
changes on cash


 


 


 


(60


)


 


 


 


(38


)


 


 


 


75


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 




net increase/(decrease) in
cash and cash equivalents


 


$



 


1,048


 


 


$



 


(151


)


 


$



 


736


 




 


 

 


 


 



 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





2011
compared with 2010

cash
provided by operating activities decreased by $1,370 million during 2011
compared with 2010 primarily due to i) increased voluntary cash contributions
of $1,050 million to our u.s. pension plans, ii) an unfavorable impact from
decreased deferred taxes (excluding the impact of cash taxes) of approximately
$710 million, and iii) higher cash tax payments of approximately $500 million,
partially offset by an $863 million increase of net income before the non-cash
pension mark-to-market adjustment. 

cash
used for investing activities decreased by $1,658 million during 2011 compared
with 2010 primarily due to an increase in proceeds from sale of businesses of
$1,149 million (most significantly the divestiture of the consumer products
group business and the automotive on-board sensor products business within our
automation and control solutions segment), a decrease in cash paid for
acquisitions of $330 million, and a net $315 million decrease in investments of
short-term marketable securities. 

cash
used for financing activities decreased by $933 million during 2011 compared to
2010 primarily due to an increase in the net proceeds from debt of $1,734
million and a decrease of $293 million in the payment of debt assumed with
acquisitions, partially offset by an increase of $1,085 million of repurchases
of common stock. 

2010
compared with 2009

cash
provided by operating activities increased by $257 million during 2010 compared
with 2009 primarily due to i) increased accrued expenses of $690 million (due
to increased customer advances and incentive compensation accruals), ii) a $550
million impact from increased deferred taxes (excluding the impact of cash
taxes), iii) increased net income of $474 million, iv) lower cash tax payments
of approximately $300 million and v) a $219 million decrease in payments for
repositioning and other charges, partially offset by a i) $1,059 unfavorable
impact from working capital driven by higher receivables and increased
purchases of raw materials and component inventory to support higher demand,
partially offset by a corresponding increase to accounts payable, ii) increased
pension and other postretirement payments of $598 million and iii) the absence
of $155 million sale of long-term receivables in 2009.

cash
used for investing activities increased by $1,136 million during 2010 compared
with 2009 primarily due to an increase in cash paid for acquisitions of $835
million (most significantly sperian protection), and a net $341 million
increase in investments in short-term marketable securities

cash
used for financing activities decreased by $105 million during 2010 compared
with 2009 primarily due to a decrease in the net repayment of debt (including
commercial paper) of $287 million and an increase in the proceeds from the
issuance of common stock, primarily related to stock option exercises of $158
million, partially offset by the repayment of $326 million of debt assumed in
the acquisition of sperian protection. 

liquidity

each
of our businesses is focused on implementing strategies to increase operating
cash flows through revenue growth, margin expansion and improved working
capital turnover. considering the current economic environment in which each of
the businesses operate and their business plans and strategies, including the
focus on growth, cost reduction and productivity initiatives, the company
believes that cash balances and operating cash flows are the principal source
of liquidity. in addition to the available cash and operating cash flows,
additional sources of liquidity include committed credit lines, short term debt
from the commercial paper markets, long-term borrowings, and access to the
public debt and equity markets, as well as the ability to sell trade accounts
receivables. at december 31, 2011, a substantial portion of the company’s cash
and cash equivalents were held by foreign subsidiaries. if the amounts held
outside of the u.s. were to be repatriated, under current 

43




law, they would be subject to u.s. federal
income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. however, our intent is to
permanently reinvest these funds outside of the u.s. it is not practicable to
estimate the amount of tax that might be payable if some or all of such
earnings were to be repatriated, and the amount of foreign tax credits that
would be available to reduce or eliminate the resulting u.s. income tax
liability.

a
source of liquidity is our ability to issue short-term debt in the commercial
paper market. commercial paper notes are sold at a discount and have a maturity
of not more than 365 days from date of issuance. borrowings under the
commercial paper program are available for general corporate purposes as well
as for financing potential acquisitions. there was $599 million of commercial
paper outstanding at december 31, 2011.

our
ability to access the commercial paper market, and the related cost of these
borrowings, is affected by the strength of our credit rating and market
conditions. our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by the major
independent debt-rating agencies. as of december 31, 2011, standard and poor’s
(s&p), fitch, and moody’s have ratings on our long-term debt of a, a and a2
respectively, and short-term debt of a-1, f1 and p1 respectively. s&p,
fitch and moody’s have honeywell’s rating outlook as “stable”. to date, the
company has not experienced any limitations in our ability to access these
sources of liquidity. 

we
also have a current shelf registration statement filed with the securities and
exchange commission under which we may issue additional debt securities, common
stock and preferred stock that may be offered in one or more offerings on terms
to be determined at the time of the offering. net proceeds of any offering
would be used for general corporate purposes, including repayment of existing
indebtedness, capital expenditures and acquisitions.

as
a source of liquidity, we sell interests in designated pools of trade accounts
receivables to third parties. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, none of the
receivables in the designated pools had been sold to third parties. when we
sell receivables, they are over-collateralized and we retain a subordinated
interest in the pool of receivables representing that over-collateralization as
well as an undivided interest in the balance of the receivables pools. the
terms of the trade accounts receivable program permit the repurchase of
receivables from the third parties at our discretion, providing us with an
additional source of revolving credit. as a result, program receivables remain
on the company’s balance sheet with a corresponding amount recorded as either
short-term borrowings or long-term debt.

in
february 2011, the company issued $800 million 4.25% senior notes due 2021 and
$600 million 5.375% senior notes due 2041 (collectively, the “notes”). the
notes are senior unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of honeywell and rank
equally with all of honeywell’s existing and future senior unsecured debt and
senior to all of honeywell’s subordinated debt. the offering resulted in gross
proceeds of $1,400 million, offset by $19 million in discount and closing costs
related to the offering. 

in
the first quarter of 2011, the company repurchased the entire outstanding
principal amount of its $400 million 5.625% notes due 2012 via a cash tender
offer and a subsequent optional redemption. the costs relating to the early
redemption of the notes, including the “make-whole premium”, was $29 million.

in
march 2011, the company entered into a $2,800 million five year credit
agreement (“credit agreement”) with a syndicate of banks. commitments under the
credit agreement can be increased pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement
to an aggregate amount not to exceed $3,500 million. the credit agreement is
maintained for general corporate purposes, including support for the issuance
of commercial paper, and replaces the previous $2,800 million five year credit
agreement dated may 14, 2007 (“prior agreement”). at december 31, 2011, there
were no borrowings or letters of credit issued under the credit facility. the
credit facility does not restrict honeywell’s ability to pay dividends, nor
does it contain financial covenants. 

in
the fourth quarter of 2011, the company repaid $500 million of its 6.125% notes
at maturity. the repayment was funded with cash provided by operating
activities. 

we
monitor the third-party depository institutions that hold our cash and cash
equivalents on a daily basis. our emphasis is primarily on safety of principal
and secondarily on maximizing yield on those funds. we diversify our cash and
cash equivalents among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these
entities.

global
economic conditions or a tightening of credit markets could adversely affect
our customers’ or suppliers’ ability to obtain financing, particularly in our
long-cycle businesses and airline and automotive end markets. customer or
supplier bankruptcies, delays in their ability to obtain financing, or the
unavailability of financing could adversely affect our cash flow or results of
operations. to date we have not experienced material impacts from customer or
supplier bankruptcy or liquidity issues. we continue to monitor and take
measures to limit our exposure. 

44




in
february 2011, the board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to a
total of $3 billion of honeywell common stock. during 2011, the company
repurchased $1,085 million of outstanding shares to offset the dilutive impact
of employee stock based compensation plans, including future option exercises,
restricted unit vesting and matching contributions under our savings plans (see
part ii, item 5 for share repurchases in the fourth quarter of 2011). 

in
july 2011, the company sold its consumer products group business (cpg) to rank
group limited. the sale was completed for approximately $955 million in cash
proceeds, resulting in a pre-tax gain of approximately $301 million and approximately $178 million net of tax. the gain was recorded in net
income from discontinued operations after taxes in the company’s consolidated
statement of operations for the year ended december 31, 2011. the net income
attributable to the non-controlling interest for the discontinued operations is
insignificant. the sale of cpg, which had been part of the transportation
systems segment, is consistent with the company’s strategic focus on its
portfolio of differentiated global technologies. see acquisitions and
divestitures in note 2 to the financial statements for further discussion.

in
august 2011, the company completed the acquisition of ems, a leading provider
of connectivity solutions for mobile networking, rugged mobile computers and
satellite communications. the aggregate value, net of cash acquired, was
approximately $513 million. see acquisitions and divestitures in note 2 to the
financial statements for further discussion.

in
december 2011, the company acquired king’s safetywear limited (ksw), a leading
international provider of branded safety footwear. the aggregate value, net of
cash acquired, was approximately $331 million (including the assumption of debt
of $33 million). see acquisitions and divestitures in note 2 to the financial
statements for further discussion.

during
2011, the company made voluntary cash contributions to its u.s. pension plans
of $1,650 million to improve the funded status of our plans. 

in
addition to our normal operating cash requirements, our principal future cash
requirements will be to fund capital expenditures, debt repayments, dividends,
employee benefit obligations, environmental remediation costs, asbestos claims,
severance and exit costs related to repositioning actions, share repurchases
and any strategic acquisitions.

specifically,
we expect our primary cash requirements in 2012 to be as follows:




 


 


 




 


•


capital expenditures—we expect to spend approximately $1.1 billion
for capital expenditures in 2012 primarily for growth, production and
capacity expansion, cost reduction, maintenance, and replacement.




 


 


 




 


•


share repurchases— under the company’s previously reported $3 billion
share repurchase program, $1.9 billion remained available as of december 31,
2011 for additional share repurchases. honeywell presently expects to
repurchase outstanding shares from time to time during 2012 to offset the
dilutive impact of employee stock based compensation plans, including future
option exercises, restricted unit vesting and matching contributions under
our savings plans. the amount and timing of future repurchases may vary
depending on market conditions and the level of operating, financing and
other investing activities. 




 


 


 




 


•


dividends—we expect to pay approximately $1.2 billion in dividends on
our common stock in 2012, reflecting the 12 percent increase in the dividend
rate effective with the fourth quarter 2011 dividend.




 


 


 




 


•


asbestos claims—we expect our cash spending for asbestos claims and
our cash receipts for related insurance recoveries to be approximately $240
and $75 million, respectively, in 2012. see asbestos matters in note 21 to the
financial statements for further discussion of possible funding obligations
in 2012 related to the narco trust.




 


 


 




 


•


pension contributions—in 2012, we plan to make cash contributions of
$800 million to $1 billion ($250 million was made in january 2012) to our
plans to improve the funded status of the plans. these contributions
principally consist of voluntary contributions to our u.s. plans. the timing
and amount of contributions may be impacted by a number of factors, including
the funded status of the plans.




 


 


 




 


•


repositioning actions—we expect that cash spending for severance and
other exit costs necessary to execute the previously announced repositioning
actions will approximate $150 million in 2012.




45









 


 


 




 


•


environmental remediation costs—we expect to spend approximately $300
million in 2012 for remedial response and voluntary clean-up costs. see
environmental matters in note 21 to the financial statements for additional
information.




we
continuously assess the relative strength of each business in our portfolio as
to strategic fit, market position, profit and cash flow contribution in order
to upgrade our combined portfolio and identify business units that will most
benefit from increased investment. we identify acquisition candidates that will
further our strategic plan and strengthen our existing core businesses. we also
identify businesses that do not fit into our long-term strategic plan based on
their market position, relative profitability or growth potential. these
businesses are considered for potential divestiture, restructuring or other
repositioning actions subject to regulatory constraints. in 2011 we realized
$1,156 million in cash proceeds from sales of non-strategic businesses.

based
on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our operating
cash flows will be sufficient to meet our future operating cash needs. our
available cash, committed credit lines, access to the public debt and equity
markets as well as our ability to sell trade accounts receivables, provide
additional sources of short-term and long-term liquidity to fund current
operations, debt maturities, and future investment opportunities. 

contractual obligations and probable
liability payments

following
is a summary of our significant contractual obligations and probable liability
payments at december 31, 2011:




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


payments by period


 


 




 


 


 


 

 



 


 




 


 


total(6)


 


2012 


 


2013-
2014


 


2015-
2016


 


thereafter




 


 

 



 

 



 

 



 

 



 

 





long-term debt, including capitalized


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




leases(1)


 


$



 


6,896


 


 


$



 


15


 


 


$



 


1,241


 


 


$



 


456


 


 


$



 


5,184


 




interest payments on long-term
debt, including capitalized leases


 


 


 


2,836


 


 


 


 


258


 


 


 


 


420


 


 


 


 


357


 


 


 


 


1,801 


 




minimum operating lease
payments


 


 


 


1,213


 


 


 


 


311


 


 


 


 


432


 


 


 


 


227


 


 


 


 


243 


 




purchase obligations(2)


 


 


 


1,566


 


 


 


 


1,086


 


 


 


 


294


 


 


 


 


122


 


 


 


 


64 


 




estimated environmental
liability


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




payments(3)


 


 


 


723


 


 


 


 


300


 


 


 


 


285


 


 


 


 


110


 


 


 


 


28 


 




asbestos related liability
payments(4)


 


 


 


1,736


 


 


 


 


237


 


 


 


 


805


 


 


 


 


460


 


 


 


 


234 


 




asbestos insurance recoveries(5)


 


 


 


780


 


 


 


 


71


 


 


 


 


205


 


 


 


 


122


 


 


 


 


382 


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


$



 


15,750


 


 


$



 


2,278


 


 


$



 


3,682


 


 


$



 


1,854


 


 


$



 


7,936 


 




 


 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 



 

 


 


 


 










 


 




(1)


assumes all long-term debt is outstanding until scheduled maturity.




 


 




(2)


purchase obligations are entered into with various vendors in the
normal course of business and are consistent with our expected requirements.




 


 




(3)


the payment amounts in the table only reflect the environmental
liabilities which are probable and reasonably estimable as of december 31,
2011. see environmental matters in note 21 to the financial statements for
additional information.




 


 




(4)


these amounts are estimates of asbestos related cash payments for
narco and bendix based on our asbestos related liabilities which are probable
and reasonably estimable as of december 31, 2011. except for amounts due upon
the effective date of the narco plan of reorganization ($76 million), we have
assumed funding for the narco trust will occur in 2013 and beyond. projecting
the timing of narco payments is dependent on, among other things, the
effective date of the trust which could cause the timing of payments to be
earlier or later than that projected. projecting future events is subject to
many uncertainties that could cause asbestos liabilities to be higher or
lower than those projected and recorded. see asbestos matters in note 21 to
the financial statements for additional information.




 


 




(5)


these amounts represent our insurance recoveries that are deemed
probable for asbestos related liabilities as of december 31, 2011. the timing
of insurance recoveries are impacted by the terms of insurance settlement
agreements, as well as the documentation, review and collection process
required to collect on 




46









 


 




 


insurance claims. where probable insurance recoveries are not subject
to definitive settlement agreements with specified payment dates, but instead
are covered by insurance policies, we have assumed collection will occur
beyond 2016. projecting the timing of insurance recoveries is subject to many
uncertainties that could cause the amounts collected to be higher or lower
than those projected and recorded or could cause the timing of collections to
be earlier or later than that projected. we reevaluate our projections
concerning insurance recoveries in light of any changes or developments that
would impact recoveries or the timing thereof. see asbestos matters in note
21 to the financial statements for additional information.




 


 




(6)


the table excludes $815 million of uncertain tax positions. see note
6 to the financial statements.




the
table also excludes our pension and other postretirement benefits (opeb)
obligations. in 2012, we plan to make cash contributions of $800 million to $1
billion ($250 million was made in january 2012) to our plans to improve the
funded status of the plans. these contributions principally consist of
voluntary contributions to our u.s. plans. the timing and amount of
contributions may be impacted by a number of factors, including the funded
status of the plans. beyond 2012, the actual amounts required to be contributed
are dependent upon, among other things, interest rates, underlying asset
returns and the impact of legislative or regulatory actions related to pension
funding obligations. payments due under our opeb plans are not required to be
funded in advance, but are paid as medical costs are incurred by covered retiree
populations, and are principally dependent upon the future cost of retiree
medical benefits under our plans. we expect our opeb payments to approximate
$167 million in 2012 net of the benefit of approximately $13 million from the
medicare prescription subsidy. see note 22 to the financial statements for
further discussion of our pension and opeb plans.

off-balance sheet arrangements

following
is a summary of our off-balance sheet arrangements:

guarantees—we have
issued or are a party to the following direct and indirect guarantees at
december 31, 2011:




 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


maximumpotentialfuturepayments




 


 

 





operating lease residual values


 


$



 


43


 




other third parties’ financing


 


 


 


5


 




unconsolidated affiliates’ financing


 


 


 


12


 




customer financing


 


 


 


13


 




 


 

 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


$



 


73


 




 


 

 


 


 


 





we
do not expect that these guarantees will have a material adverse effect on our
consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.

in
connection with the disposition of certain businesses and facilities we have
indemnified the purchasers for the expected cost of remediation of
environmental contamination, if any, existing on the date of disposition. such
expected costs are accrued when environmental assessments are made or remedial
efforts are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.

environmental matters

we
are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign government
requirements relating to the protection of the environment. we believe that, as
a general matter, our policies, practices and procedures are properly designed
to prevent unreasonable risk of environmental damage and personal injury and
that our handling, manufacture, use and disposal of hazardous substances are in
accordance with environmental and safety laws and regulations. however, mainly
because of past operations and operations of predecessor companies, we, like
other companies engaged in similar businesses, have incurred remedial response
and voluntary cleanup costs for site contamination and are a party to lawsuits
and claims associated with environmental and safety matters, including past
production of products containing hazardous substances. additional lawsuits,
claims and costs involving environmental matters are likely to continue to
arise in the future.

47




with
respect to environmental matters involving site contamination, we continually
conduct studies, individually or jointly, with other potentially
responsible parties, to determine the feasibility of various remedial
techniques to address environmental matters. it is our policy (see note 1 to
the financial statements) to record appropriate liabilities for environmental
matters when remedial efforts or damage claim payments are probable and the costs
can be reasonably estimated. such liabilities are based on our best estimate of
the undiscounted future costs required to complete the remedial work. the
recorded liabilities are adjusted periodically as remediation efforts progress
or as additional technical or legal information becomes available. given the
uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations, enforcement policies,
the impact of other potentially responsible parties, technology and information
related to individual sites, we do not believe it is possible to develop an
estimate of the range of reasonably possible environmental loss in excess of
our recorded liabilities. we expect to fund expenditures for these matters from
operating cash flow. the timing of cash expenditures depends on a number of
factors, including the timing of litigation and settlements of remediation
liability, personal injury and property damage claims, regulatory approval of
cleanup projects, execution timeframe of projects, remedial techniques to be
utilized and agreements with other parties.

remedial
response and voluntary cleanup costs charged against pretax earnings were $240,
$225 and $151 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. at december 31,
2011 and 2010, the recorded liabilities for environmental matters was $723 and
$753 million, respectively. in addition, in 2011 and 2010 we incurred operating
costs for ongoing businesses of approximately $102 and $86 million,
respectively, relating to compliance with environmental regulations.

remedial
response and voluntary cleanup payments were $270, $266 and $318 million in
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and are currently estimated to be
approximately $300 million in 2012. we expect to fund such expenditures from
operating cash flow.

although
we do not currently possess sufficient information to reasonably estimate the
amounts of liabilities to be recorded upon future completion of studies,
litigation or settlements, and neither the timing nor the amount of the
ultimate costs associated with environmental matters can be determined, they
could be material to our consolidated results of operations or operating cash
flows in the periods recognized or paid. however, considering our past
experience and existing reserves, we do not expect that environmental matters
will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position.

see
note 21 to the financial statements for a discussion of our commitments and
contingencies, including those related to environmental matters and toxic tort
litigation.

financial instruments

as
a result of our global operating and financing activities, we are exposed to
market risks from changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and
commodity prices, which may adversely affect our operating results and
financial position. we minimize our risks from interest and foreign currency
exchange rate and commodity price fluctuations through our normal operating and
financing activities and, when deemed appropriate, through the use of
derivative financial instruments. we do not use derivative financial
instruments for trading or other speculative purposes and do not use leveraged
derivative financial instruments. a summary of our accounting policies for
derivative financial instruments is included in note 1 to the financial
statements. we also hold investments in marketable equity securities, which
exposes us to market volatility, as discussed in note 16 to the financial
statements.

we
conduct our business on a multinational basis in a wide variety of foreign
currencies. our exposure to market risk from changes in foreign currency
exchange rates arises from international financing activities between
subsidiaries, foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities and
anticipated transactions arising from international trade. our objective is to
preserve the economic value of non-functional currency cash flows. we attempt
to hedge transaction exposures with natural offsets to the fullest extent
possible and, once these opportunities have been exhausted, through foreign
currency forward and option agreements with third parties. our principal
currency exposures relate to the u.s. dollar, euro, british pound, canadian
dollar, hong kong dollar, mexican peso, swiss franc, czech koruna, chinese
renminbi, indian rupee, singapore dollar, swedish krona, korean won and thai
baht.

our
exposure to market risk from changes in interest rates relates primarily to our
net debt and pension obligations. as described in notes 14 and 16 to the
financial statements, we issue both fixed and variable rate debt and use
interest rate swaps to manage our exposure to interest rate movements and
reduce overall borrowing costs.

48





financial
instruments, including derivatives, expose us to counterparty credit risk for
nonperformance and to market risk related to changes in interest or currency
exchange rates. we manage our exposure to counterparty credit risk through
specific minimum credit standards, diversification of counterparties, and
procedures to monitor concentrations of credit risk. our counterparties are
substantial investment and commercial banks with significant experience using
such derivative instruments. we monitor the impact of market risk on the fair
value and expected future cash flows of our derivative and other financial
instruments considering reasonably possible changes in interest and currency
exchange rates and restrict the use of derivative financial instruments to
hedging activities.

the
following table illustrates the potential change in fair value for interest
rate sensitive instruments based on a hypothetical immediate
one-percentage-point increase in interest rates across all maturities, the
potential change in fair value for foreign exchange rate sensitive instruments
based on a 10 percent weakening of the u.s. dollar versus local currency
exchange rates across all maturities, and the potential change in fair value of
contracts hedging commodity purchases based on a 20 percent decrease in the
price of the underlying commodity across all maturities at december 31, 2011
and 2010.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
face or
notional
amount
 
 
  
 
 
carrying
value(1)
 
 
  
 
 
fair
value(1)
 
 
  
 
 
estimated
increase
(decrease)
in fair
value
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate
sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt (including
current maturities)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,896
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(6,896
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(7,896
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(578
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate swap agreements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,400
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(74
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
exchange rate sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange
contracts(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
274 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity
price sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forward commodity contracts(3)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(10
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate
sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt (including
current maturities)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,278
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(6,278
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(6,835
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(399
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate swap agreements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(18
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
exchange rate sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange
contracts(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,733
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
102 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity
price sensitive instruments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forward commodity contracts(3)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
23
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 




 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
asset or
(liability).
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
changes in the
fair value of foreign currency exchange contracts are offset by changes in
the fair value or cash flows of underlying hedged foreign currency
transactions.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(3)
 
 
changes in the
fair value of forward commodity contracts are offset by changes in the cash
flows of underlying hedged commodity transactions.
 
 
 

the above
discussion of our procedures to monitor market risk and the estimated changes
in fair value resulting from our sensitivity analyses are forward-looking
statements of market risk assuming certain adverse market conditions occur.
actual results in the future may differ materially from these estimated results
due to actual developments in the global financial markets. the methods used by
us to assess and mitigate risk discussed above should not be considered
projections of future events.

49



critical accounting
policies

the
preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles is based on the selection and
application of accounting policies that require us to make significant
estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are inherently
uncertain. we consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical
to the understanding of our financial statements. actual results could differ
from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material
to our consolidated financial statements.

we have
discussed the selection, application and disclosure of these critical
accounting policies with the audit committee of our board of directors and our
independent registered public accountants. new accounting standards effective
in 2011 which had a material impact on our consolidated financial statements
are described in the recent accounting pronouncements section in note 1 to the
financial statements.

contingent liabilities—we are subject to a number of
lawsuits, investigations and claims (some of which involve substantial dollar
amounts) that arise out of the conduct of our global business operations or
those of previously owned entities, including matters relating to commercial
transactions, government contracts, product liability (including asbestos),
prior acquisitions and divestitures, employee benefit plans, intellectual
property, and environmental, health and safety matters. we recognize a
liability for any contingency that is probable of occurrence and reasonably
estimable. we continually assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments or
outcomes to our contingencies, as well as potential amounts or ranges of
probable losses, and recognize a liability, if any, for these contingencies
based on a careful analysis of each matter with the assistance of outside legal
counsel and, if applicable, other experts. such analysis includes making
judgments concerning matters such as the costs associated with environmental
matters, the outcome of negotiations, the number and cost of pending and future
asbestos claims, and the impact of evidentiary requirements. because most
contingencies are resolved over long periods of time, liabilities may change in
the future due to new developments (including new discovery of facts, changes
in legislation and outcomes of similar cases through the judicial system),
changes in assumptions or changes in our settlement strategy. for a discussion
of our contingencies related to environmental, asbestos and other matters,
including management’s judgment applied in the recognition and measurement of
specific liabilities, see notes 1 and 21 to the financial statements.

asbestos related contingencies and insurance
recoveries—we are a defendant in personal injury actions
related to products containing asbestos (refractory and friction products). we
recognize a liability for any asbestos related contingency that is probable of
occurrence and reasonably estimable. regarding north american refractories
company (narco) asbestos related claims, we accrued for pending claims based on
terms and conditions in agreements with narco, its former parent
company, and certain asbestos claimants, and an estimate of the unsettled
claims pending as of the time narco filed for bankruptcy protection. we also
accrued for the estimated value of future narco asbestos related claims
expected to be asserted against the narco trust through 2018 as described in
note 21 to the financial statements. in light of the inherent uncertainties in
making long term projections and in connection with the initial operation of a
524(g) trust, as well as the stay of all narco asbestos claims since january
2002, we do not believe that we have a reasonable basis for estimating narco
asbestos claims beyond 2018. regarding bendix asbestos related claims, we accrued
for the estimated value of pending claims using average resolution values for
the previous five years. we also accrued for the estimated value of future
anticipated claims related to bendix for the next five years based on historic
claims filing experience and dismissal rates, disease classifications, and
average resolution values in the tort system for the previous five years. in light of
the uncertainties inherent in making long-term projections, as well as certain
factors unique to friction product asbestos claims, we do not believe that we
have a reasonable basis for estimating asbestos claims beyond the next five
years. we will continue to update the resolution values used to estimate the
cost of pending and future bendix claims during the fourth quarter each year.
for additional information see note 21 to the financial statements. we
continually assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments or outcomes to our
contingencies, as well as potential ranges of probable losses and recognize a
liability, if any, for these contingencies based on an analysis of each
individual issue with the assistance of outside legal counsel and, if
applicable, other experts.

in
connection with the recognition of liabilities for asbestos related matters, we
record asbestos related insurance recoveries that are deemed probable. in
assessing the probability of insurance recovery, we make judgments concerning
insurance coverage that we believe are reasonable and consistent with our
historical experience with our insurers, our knowledge of any pertinent
solvency issues surrounding insurers, various judicial determinations relevant
to our insurance programs and our consideration of the impacts of any
settlements with our insurers. our insurance is with both the domestic insurance
market and the london excess market. while the substantial majority of our
insurance carriers are solvent, some of our individual carriers are insolvent,
which has been considered in our analysis of probable recoveries. projecting
future events is subject to 

50



various uncertainties that could cause the insurance recovery on
asbestos related liabilities to be higher or lower than that projected and
recorded. given the inherent uncertainty in making future projections, we
reevaluate our projections concerning our probable insurance recoveries in
light of any changes to the projected liability, our recovery experience or
other relevant factors that may impact future insurance recoveries. see note 21
to the financial statements for a discussion of management’s judgments applied
in the recognition and measurement of insurance recoveries for asbestos related
liabilities.

defined benefit pension plans— we sponsor both funded and
unfunded u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension plans covering the majority
of our employees and retirees. 

we
recognize changes in the fair value of plan assets and net actuarial gains or
losses in excess of 10 percent of the greater of the market-related value of
plan assets or the plans’ projected benefit obligation (the corridor) annually
in the fourth quarter each year (mtm adjustment). net actuarial gains and losses occur
when the actual experience differs from any of the various assumptions used to
value our pension plans or when assumptions change as they may each year. the
primary factors contributing to actuarial gains and losses are changes in the
discount rate used to value pension obligations as of the measurement date each
year and the differences between expected and actual returns on plan assets. this
accounting method also results in the potential for volatile and difficult to
forecast mtm adjustments. mtm adjustments were $1,802, $471 and $741 million in
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the remaining components of pension expense,
primarily service and interest costs and assumed return on plan assets, are
recorded on a quarterly basis (on-going pension expense). 

for
financial reporting purposes, net periodic pension expense is calculated based
upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan
obligations and an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. we
determine the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets utilizing
historical plan asset returns over varying long-term periods combined with our
expectations on future market conditions and asset mix considerations (see note
22 to the financial statements for details on the actual various asset classes
and targeted asset allocation percentages for our pension plans). the discount
rate reflects the market rate on december 31 (measurement date) for
high-quality fixed-income investments with maturities corresponding to our
benefit obligations and is subject to change each year. further information on
all our major actuarial assumptions is included in note 22 to the financial
statements.

the key
assumptions used in developing our 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic pension expense for
our u.s. plans included the following:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.75
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6.95
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected rate of return
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual rate of return
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual 10 year average annual
compounded rate of return
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 


the
discount rate can be volatile from year to year because it is determined based
upon prevailing interest rates as of the measurement date. we will use a 4.89
percent discount rate in 2012, reflecting the decrease in the market interest
rate environment since december 31, 2010. we plan to continue to use an
expected rate of return on plan assets of 8 percent for 2012 as this is a
long-term rate based on historical plan asset returns over varying long-term
periods combined with our expectations on future market conditions and the
asset mix of the plan’s investments. 

in addition
to the potential for mtm adjustments, changes in our expected rate of return on
plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events also affects
future on-going pension expense. the following table highlights the sensitivity
of our u.s. pension obligations and on-going expense to changes in these
assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant. these estimates
exclude any potential mtm adjustment:

51







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in
assumption
 
 
  
 
 
impact on 2012
on-going
pension
expense
 
 
  
 
 
impact on pbo
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
0.25 percentage point decrease in discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
decrease $10 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
increase $410 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
0.25 percentage point increase in discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
increase $8 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
decrease $400 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
0.25 percentage point decrease in expected rate of return on assets
 
 
  
 
 
increase $32 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
0.25 percentage point increase in expected rate of return on assets
 
 
  
 
 
decrease $32 million
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


on-going
pension expense for all of our pension plans is expected to be approximately
$60 million in 2012, a decrease of $45 million from 2011, due primarily to the
impact of planned cash contributions in 2012. also, if required, an mtm
adjustment will be recorded in the fourth quarter of 2012 in accordance with
our pension accounting method as previously described. it is difficult to
reliably forecast or predict whether there will be a mtm adjustment in 2012,
and if one is required what the magnitude of such adjustment will be. mtm
adjustments are primarily driven by events and circumstances beyond the control
of the company such as changes in interest rates and the performance of the
financial markets. 

in 2011,
2010 and 2009,
we were not required to make contributions to satisfy minimum statutory funding
requirements in our u.s. pension plans. however, we made voluntary
contributions of $1,650, $1,000 and $740 million to our u.s. pension plans in 2011, 2010
and 2009,
respectively, primarily to improve the funded status of our plans which has
been adversely impacted by relatively low discount rates and asset losses in
2011 and 2008 resulting from the poor performance of the equity markets. in
2012, we plan to make cash contributions of $800 million to $1 billion ($250
million was made in january 2012) to our plans to improve the funded status of the
plans. these contributions principally consist of voluntary contributions to
our u.s. plans. the timing and amount of contributions may be
impacted by a number of factors, including the funded status of the plans.

long-lived
assets (including tangible and definite-lived intangible assets)—to conduct our global business
operations and execute our business strategy, we acquire tangible and
intangible assets, including property, plant and equipment and definite-lived
intangible assets. at december 31, 2011, the net carrying amount of these
long-lived assets totaled approximately $6.5 billion. the determination of
useful lives (for depreciation/amortization purposes) and whether or not these
assets are impaired involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions,
changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating
performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. we
periodically evaluate the recoverability of the carrying amount of our
long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of a long-lived asset group may not be fully recoverable. the
principal factors we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review
are as follows: 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
significant
under-performance (i.e., declines in sales, earnings or cash flows) of a
business or product line in relation to expectations; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
annual operating
plans or five-year strategic plans that indicate an unfavorable trend in
operating performance of a business or product line; 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
significant
negative industry or economic trends; and 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
significant
changes or planned changes in our use of the assets.
 
 


once it is
determined that an impairment review is necessary, recoverability of assets is
measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset grouping to the
estimated future undiscounted cash flows. if the carrying amount exceeds the
estimated future undiscounted cash flows, the asset grouping is considered to
be impaired. the impairment is then measured as the difference between the
carrying amount of the asset grouping and its fair value. we endeavor to
utilize the best information available to measure fair value, which is usually
either market prices (if available), level 1 or level 2 in the fair value
hierarchy or an estimate of the future discounted cash flow, level 3 of the
fair value hierarchy. the key estimates in our discounted cash flow analysis
include expected industry growth rates, our assumptions as to volume, selling
prices and costs, and the discount rate selected. as described in more detail
in note 16 to the financial statements, we have recorded impairment charges
related to long-lived assets of $127 million and $30 million in 2011 and 2010,
respectively, principally related to manufacturing plant and equipment in
facilities scheduled to close or be downsized.

52



goodwill
impairment testing—goodwill represents the excess of acquisition costs
over the fair value of the net tangible assets and identifiable intangible
assets acquired in a business combination. goodwill is not amortized, but is
subject to impairment testing. our goodwill balance, $11.9 billion as of
december 31, 2011, is subject to impairment testing annually as of
march 31, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount may not be fully recoverable. this testing compares carrying
values to fair values and, when appropriate, the carrying value is reduced to
fair value. the fair value of our reporting units is estimated utilizing a
discounted cash flow approach utilizing cash flow forecasts in our five year
strategic and annual operating plans adjusted for terminal value assumptions.
this impairment test involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions,
changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating
performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. to
address this uncertainty we perform sensitivity analysis on key estimates and
assumptions. 

we
completed our annual impairment test as of march 31, 2011 and determined that
there was no impairment as of that date. however, significant negative industry
or economic trends, disruptions to our business, unexpected significant changes
or planned changes in use of the assets, divestitures and market capitalization
declines may have a negative effect on the fair value of our reporting units. 

income taxes—deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on
the difference between the financial statements and tax basis of assets and
liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the
differences are expected to reverse. our provision for income taxes is based on
domestic and international statutory income tax rates in the jurisdictions in
which we operate. significant judgment is required in determining income tax
provisions as well as deferred tax asset and liability balances, including the
estimation of valuation allowances and the evaluation of tax positions.

as
of december 31, 2011, we recognized a net deferred tax asset of $2,421 million,
less a valuation allowance of $591 million. net deferred tax assets are
primarily comprised of net deductible temporary differences, net operating loss
carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards that are available to reduce taxable
income in future periods. the determination of the amount of valuation
allowance to be provided on recorded deferred tax assets involves estimates
regarding (1) the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary
differences, (2) expected future taxable income, and (3) the impact of tax
planning strategies. a valuation allowance is established to offset any
deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence it is more likely
than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. in
assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available
positive and negative evidence, including past operating results, projections
of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning
strategies. the projections of future taxable income include a number of
estimates and assumptions regarding our volume, pricing and costs.
additionally, valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets can be
impacted by changes to tax laws.

our
net deferred tax asset of $2,421 million consists of $1,516 million related to
u.s. operations and $905 million related to non-u.s. operations. the u.s. net
deferred tax asset of $1,516 million consists of net deductible temporary
differences, tax credit carryforwards, federal and state tax net operating
losses which we believe will more likely than not be realized through the
generation of future taxable income in the u.s. and tax planning strategies. we
maintain a valuation allowance of $5 million against such asset related to
state net operating losses. the non-u.s. net deferred tax asset of $905 million
consists principally of net operating and capital loss carryforwards, mainly in
france, netherlands, luxembourg and germany. we maintain a valuation allowance
of $588 million against these deferred tax assets reflecting our historical
experience and lower expectations of taxable income over the applicable carryforward
periods. as more fully described in note 6 to the financial statements, our
valuation allowance decreased by $45 million in 2011 and increased by $58
million and $133 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively. in the event we
determine that we will not be able to realize our net deferred tax assets in
the future, we will reduce such amounts through a charge to income in the
period such determination is made. conversely, if we determine that we will be
able to realize net deferred tax assets in excess of the carrying amounts, we
will decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a credit to income in
the period that such determination is made.

significant
judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax
positions. we establish additional reserves for income taxes when, despite the
belief that tax positions are fully supportable, there remain certain positions
that do not meet the minimum recognition threshold. the approach for evaluating
certain and uncertain tax positions is defined by the authoritative guidance
and this guidance determines when a tax position is more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority. in the normal
course of business, the company and its subsidiaries are examined by various
federal, state and foreign tax authorities. we regularly assess the potential
outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations for the current or
prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. we
continually 

53



assess the
likelihood and amount of potential adjustments and adjust the income tax
provision, the current tax liability and deferred taxes in the period in which
the facts that give rise to a revision become known.

sales
recognition on long-term contracts—in 2011, we recognized
approximately 16 percent of our total net sales using the
percentage-of-completion method for long-term contracts in our automation and
control solutions, aerospace and performance materials and technologies
segments. these long-term contracts are measured on the cost-to-cost basis for
engineering-type contracts and the units-of-delivery basis for production-type
contracts. accounting for these contracts involves management judgment in estimating
total contract revenue and cost. contract revenues are largely determined by
negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions
regarding contract options, change orders, incentive and award provisions
associated with technical performance and price adjustment clauses (such as
inflation or index-based clauses). contract costs are incurred over a period of
time, which can be several years, and the estimation of these costs requires
management judgment. cost estimates are largely based on negotiated or
estimated purchase contract terms, historical performance trends and other
economic projections. significant factors that influence these estimates
include inflationary trends, technical and schedule risk, internal and
subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset
utilization, and anticipated labor agreements. revenue and cost estimates are
regularly monitored and revised based on changes in circumstances. anticipated
losses on long-term contracts are recognized when such losses become evident.
we maintain financial controls over the customer qualification, contract
pricing and estimation processes to reduce the risk of contract losses.

54




other
matters

litigation

see
note 21 to the financial statements for a discussion of environmental, asbestos
and other litigation matters.

recent accounting pronouncements

see
note 1 to the financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting
pronouncements.

item 7a. quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk

information
relating to market risk is included in item 7. management discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations under the caption
“financial instruments”.

55



item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data 

honeywell international
inc.
consolidated statement of operations


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 


 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(dollars in millions, except
per share amounts)
 
 
  
 
 


 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
product sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
28,745
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
25,242
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
22,957 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,784
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,994 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29,951 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
costs, expenses and other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
23,220
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19,903
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18,565 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of services sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,336
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,818
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,695 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28,556
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24,721
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
23,260 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and
administrative 
expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,399
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,618
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,323 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other (income) expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(84
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(97
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(54)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest and other financial
charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
376
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
386
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
458 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
34,247
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29,628
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
27,987 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing operations before
taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,722
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,964 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
765
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
436 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing operations after
taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,865
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,957
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,528 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued operations after
taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
56 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,074
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,035
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,584 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
less: net income attributable
to the noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,548 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts attributable to honeywell:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,944
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,492 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
56 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,548 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  
  
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share of common stock - basic:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.99 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.27
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.07 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.65
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.06 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share of common
stock - assuming dilution:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.35
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.49
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.98 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.07 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2.05 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash dividends per share of common stock
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1.37
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1.21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1.21 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  
 
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

the notes to financial
statements are an integral part of this statement.

56



honeywell international
inc.
consolidated balance sheet


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(dollars in millions)
 

 



 
 
assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


 
 
current assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash and cash equivalents
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,698
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,650
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts, notes and other
receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,228
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,841
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
inventories
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,264
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,822
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
460
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
877
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
investments and other current
assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
484
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
455
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
assets held for sale
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
841
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total current assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16,134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,486
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments and long-term receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
616
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
property, plant and equipment - net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,804
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,724
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
goodwill
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,275
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other intangible assets - net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,477
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,537
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance recoveries for asbestos related
liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
709
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
825
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,132
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,221
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,200
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,150
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total assets
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
39,808
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
37,834
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
current liabilities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts payable
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,738
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,199
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short-term borrowings
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
67
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commercial paper
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
599
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
299
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
current maturities of
long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
523
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,863
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,446
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
liabilities related to assets
held for sale
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
190
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total current liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,275
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,724
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,881
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,755
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
676
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
636
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
postretirement benefit obligations other
than pensions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,477
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,499
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,557
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,158
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,898
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
shareowners’ equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
capital - common stock issued
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
- additional paid-in capital
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,977
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common stock held in treasury, at cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8,948
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8,299
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,444
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,067
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
retained earnings
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16,083
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,097
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total honeywell shareowners’
equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,806
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,666
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
96
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
121
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total shareowners’ equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,902
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,787
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total liabilities and
shareowners’ equity
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
39,808
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
37,834
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

the notes to financial
statements are an integral part of this statement.

57




honeywell international inc. 
consolidated
statement of cash flows


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(dollars in
millions)
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,548 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
adjustments to reconcile net
income attributable to honeywell to net cash provided by operating
activities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
depreciation and amortization
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
957
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
987
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
957 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gain on sale of non-strategic
businesses and assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(362
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(87
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
repositioning and other
charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
743
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
478 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net payments for repositioning
and other charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(468
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(439
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(658
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pension and other
postretirement expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,823
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
689
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,022 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pension and other
postretirement benefit payments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,788
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(787
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(189
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
stock compensation expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
168
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
164
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
118 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(331
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
878
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
47 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
excess tax benefits from share
based payment arrangements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(42
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
194
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(24
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
261 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in assets and
liabilities, net of the effects of acquisitions and divestitures:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts, notes and other
receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(316
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(688
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
360 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
inventories
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(310
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(300
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
475 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other current assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(43
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts payable
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
527
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
592
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(169
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(54
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
548
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(173
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net cash provided by operating activities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,833
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,203
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,946 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
cash flows from investing activities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expenditures for property,
plant and equipment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(798
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(651
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(609
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
proceeds from disposals of
property, plant and equipment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
31 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
increase in investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(380
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(453
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(24
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
decrease in investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
354
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash paid for acquisitions,
net of cash acquired
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(973
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,303
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(468
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
proceeds from sales of
businesses,net of fees paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,156
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(65
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net cash used for investing activities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(611
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,269
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,133
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash flows from financing activities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net increase/(decrease) in
commercial paper
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
300
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,133
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net (decrease)/increase in
short-term borrowings
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(521
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
payment of debt assumed with
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(33
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(326
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
proceeds from issuance of
common stock
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
304
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
195
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
37 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
proceeds from issuance of
long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,390
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,488 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
payments of long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(939
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,006
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,106
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
excess tax benefits from share
based payment arrangements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
repurchases of common stock
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,085
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash dividends paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,091
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(944
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(918
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net cash used for financing activities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,114
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,047
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,152
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(60
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(38
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
75 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,048
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(151
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
736 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,650
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,801
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,065 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,698
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,650
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,801 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

the notes to financial
statements are an integral part of this statement.

58



honeywell international inc.
consolidated
statement of shareowners’ equity


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
shares
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
shares
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
shares
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(in millions)
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
common stock,
par value
 
 
  
 
 
957.6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
957.6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
957.6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
additional
paid-in capital
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,977
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,823
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,994 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
issued for employee savings
and option plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(35
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(99
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
contributed to pension plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(190
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
stock-based compensation
expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
168
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
118 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other owner changes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ending balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,977
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,823 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
treasury
stock
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning balance
 
 
  
 
 
(174.6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(8,299
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(193.4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(8,995
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(223.0
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(10,206
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reacquired stock or
repurchases of common stock
 
 
  
 
 
(20.3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(1,085
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
issued for employee savings
and option plans
 
 
  
 
 
12.0
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
436
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8.9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
328
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6.6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
281 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
contributed to pension plans
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9.9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
368
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
23.0
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
930 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ending balance
 
 
  
 
 
(182.9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(8,948
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(174.6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(8,299
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(193.4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(8,995
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
retained
earnings
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,097
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14,023
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,391 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,067
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,022
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,548 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dividends paid on common stock
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,081
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(948
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(916
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ending balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16,083
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,097
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14,023 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,067
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(948
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,078
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation
adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(146
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(249
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
259 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post
retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(209
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(271
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of
available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of
effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
30 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ending balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,444
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,067
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(948
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non
controlling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
121
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
110
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
82 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest sold (bought)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(5
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income attributable to non
controlling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation
adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dividends paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(23
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(10
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other owner changes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ending balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
96
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
121
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
110 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total
shareowners equity
 
 
  
 
 
774.7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,902
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
783.0
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,787
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
764.2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,971 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
comprehensive
income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,074
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,035
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,584 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation
adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(146
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(249
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
259 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post
retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(209
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(271
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of
available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of
effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
30 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total
comprehensive income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,697
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,916
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,714 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
comprehensive income
attributable to non controlling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(15
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(36
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
comprehensive income (loss)
attributable to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,694
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,901
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,678 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

the notes to financial
statements are integral part of this statement.

59



note 1. summary of significant accounting
policies 

accounting principles—the
financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. the
following is a description of honeywell’s significant accounting policies..

principles of
consolidation—the consolidated financial statements include the
accounts of honeywell international inc. and all of its subsidiaries and
entities in which a controlling interest is maintained. our consolidation
policy requires equity investments that we exercise significant influence over
but do not control the investee and are not the primary beneficiary of the
investee’s activities to be accounted for using the equity method. investments
through which we are not able to exercise significant influence over the
investee and which we do not have readily determinable fair values are
accounted for under the cost method. all intercompany transactions and balances
are eliminated in consolidation.

the
consumer products group (cpg) automotive aftermarket business had historically
been part of the transportation systems reportable segment. in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, cpg is presented as discontinued
operations in all periods presented. see note 2 acquisitions and divestitures
for further details.

cash and cash
equivalents—cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand and
on deposit and highly liquid, temporary cash investments with an original
maturity of three months or less.

inventories—inventories
are valued at the lower of cost or market using the first-in, first-out or the
average cost method and the last-in, first-out (lifo) method for certain
qualifying domestic inventories.

investments—investments
in affiliates over which we have a significant influence, but not a controlling
interest, are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. other
investments are carried at market value, if readily determinable, or at cost.
all equity investments are periodically reviewed to determine if declines in
fair value below cost basis are other-than-temporary. significant and sustained
decreases in quoted market prices or a series of historic and projected
operating losses by investees are strong indicators of other-than-temporary
declines. if the decline in fair value is determined to be
other-than-temporary, an impairment loss is recorded and the investment is
written down to a new carrying value.

property, plant
and equipment—property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost,
including any asset retirement obligations, less accumulated depreciation. for
financial reporting, the straight-line method of depreciation is used over the
estimated useful lives of 10 to 50 years for buildings and improvements and 2
to 16 years for machinery and equipment. recognition of the fair value of
obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets is
required when there is a legal obligation to incur such costs. upon initial
recognition of a liability, the cost is capitalized as part of the related
long-lived asset and depreciated over the corresponding asset’s useful life.
see note 11 and note 17 for additional details.

goodwill and
indefinite-lived intangible assets—goodwill represents the
excess of acquisition costs over the fair value of tangible net assets and
identifiable intangible assets of businesses acquired. goodwill and certain
other intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized.
intangible assets determined to have definite lives are amortized over their
useful lives. goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets are subject to
impairment testing annually as of march 31, or whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable.
this testing compares carrying values to fair values and, when appropriate, the
carrying value of these assets is reduced to fair value. we completed our
annual goodwill impairment test as of march 31, 2011 and determined that there
was no impairment as of that date. see note 12 for additional details on
goodwill balances.

other intangible
assets with determinable lives—other intangible assets
with determinable lives consist of customer lists, technology, patents and
trademarks and other intangibles and are amortized over their estimated useful
lives, ranging from 2 to 24 years.

long-lived assets—we
periodically evaluate the recoverability of the carrying amount of long-lived
assets (including property, plant and equipment and intangible assets with
determinable lives) whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that
the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. we evaluate
events or changes in circumstances based on a number of factors including
operating results, business plans and forecasts, general and industry trends
and, economic projections and anticipated cash flows. an impairment is assessed
when the undiscounted expected future cash flows derived from an asset are less
than its carrying amount. impairment losses are measured as the amount by which
the carrying value of an asset exceeds its fair value and are recognized in
earnings. we also continually evaluate the estimated useful lives of all
long-lived assets and periodically revise such estimates based on current
events.

60



sales recognition—product
and service sales are recognized when persuasive evidence of an arrangement
exists, product delivery has occurred or services have been rendered, pricing
is fixed or determinable, and collection is reasonably assured. service sales,
principally representing repair, maintenance and engineering activities in our
aerospace and automation and control solutions segments, are recognized over
the contractual period or as services are rendered. sales under long-term
contracts in the aerospace and automation and control solutions segments are
recorded on a percentage-of-completion method measured on the cost-to-cost
basis for engineering-type contracts and the units-of-delivery basis for
production-type contracts. provisions for anticipated losses on long-term
contracts are recorded in full when such losses become evident. revenues from
contracts with multiple element arrangements are recognized as each element is
earned based on the relative fair value of each element provided the delivered
elements have value to customers on a standalone basis. amounts allocated to
each element are based on its objectively determined fair value, such as the
sales price for the product or service when it is sold separately or competitor
prices for similar products or services.

allowance for
doubtful accounts—we maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for
estimated losses as a result of customer’s inability to make required payments.
we estimate anticipated losses from doubtful accounts based on days past due,
as measured from the contractual due date, historical collection history and
incorporate changes in economic conditions that may not be reflected in
historical trends for example, customers in bankruptcy, liquidation or
reorganization. receivables are written-off against the allowance for doubtful
accounts when they are determined uncollectible. such determination includes
analysis and consideration of the particular conditions of the account,
including time intervals since last collection, success of outside collection
agencies activity, solvency of customer and any bankruptcy proceedings.

environmental
expenditures—environmental expenditures that relate to current
operations are expensed or capitalized as appropriate. expenditures that relate
to an existing condition caused by past operations, and that do not provide
future benefits, are expensed as incurred. liabilities are recorded when
environmental remedial efforts or damage claim payments are probable and the
costs can be reasonably estimated. such liabilities are based on our best
estimate of the undiscounted future costs required to complete the remedial
work. the recorded liabilities are adjusted periodically as remediation efforts
progress or as additional technical, regulatory or legal information becomes
available. given the uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations,
enforcement policies, the impact of other potentially responsible parties,
technology and information related to individual sites, we do not believe it is
possible to develop an estimate of the range of reasonably possible
environmental loss in excess of our recorded liabilities.

          
asbestos related contingencies and insurance recoveries—honeywell
is a defendant in personal injury actions related to products containing asbestos
(refractory and friction products). we recognize a liability for any asbestos
related contingency that is probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable.
regarding north american refractories company (narco) asbestos related claims,
we accrued for pending claims based on terms and conditions in  agreements
with narco, its former parent company, and certain asbestos claimants, and an
estimate of the unsettled claims pending as of the time narco filed for
bankruptcy protection. we also accrued for the estimated value of future narco
asbestos related claims expected to be asserted against the narco trust through
2018 as described in note 21. in light of the inherent uncertainties
in making long term projections and in connection with the initial operation
of a 524(g) trust, as well as the stay of all narco asbestos claims since january
2002, we do not believe that we have a reasonable basis for estimating narco
asbestos claims beyond 2018. regarding bendix asbestos related claims, we
accrued for the estimated value of pending claims using average resolution
values for the previous five years. we also accrued for the estimated value of
future anticipated claims related to bendix for the next five years based on
historic claims filing experience and dismissal rates, disease classifications,
and average resolution values in the tort system for the previous five years. in light
of the uncertainties inherent in making long-term projections, as well as
certain factors unique to friction product asbestos claims, we do not believe
that we have a reasonable basis for estimating asbestos claims beyond the next
five years. we will continue to update the resolution values used to estimate
the cost of pending and future bendix claims during the fourth quarter each
year. for additional information see note 21. we continually assess the
likelihood of any adverse judgments or outcomes to our contingencies, as well
as potential ranges of probable losses and recognize a liability, if any, for
these contingencies based on an analysis of each individual issue with the
assistance of outside legal counsel and, if applicable, other experts.

in
connection with the recognition of liabilities for asbestos related matters, we
record asbestos related insurance recoveries that are deemed probable. in
assessing the probability of insurance recovery, we make judgments concerning
insurance coverage that we believe are reasonable and consistent with our
historical experience with our insurers, our knowledge of any pertinent
solvency issues surrounding insurers, various judicial determinations relevant
to our insurance programs and our consideration of the impacts of any
settlements with our insurers.

61




aerospace
sales incentives—we provide sales incentives to commercial aircraft
manufacturers and airlines in connection with their selection of our aircraft
equipment, predominately wheel and braking system hardware and auxiliary power
units, for installation on commercial aircraft. these incentives principally
consist of free or deeply discounted products, but also include credits for
future purchases of product and upfront cash payments. these costs are
recognized in the period incurred as cost of products sold or as a reduction to
sales, as appropriate. for aircraft manufacturers, incentives are recorded when
the products are delivered; for airlines, incentives are recorded when the
associated aircraft are delivered by the aircraft manufacturer to the airline.

research
and development—research and development costs for company-sponsored
research and development projects are expensed as incurred. such costs are
principally included in cost of products sold and were $1,799, $1,450 and $1,321
million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

stock-based
compensation plans—the principal awards issued under our stock-based
compensation plans, which are described in note 20, include non-qualified stock
options and restricted stock units (rsus). the cost for such awards is measured
at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. the value of the
portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as
expense over the requisite service periods (generally the vesting period of the
equity award) and is included in selling, general and administrative expense in
our consolidated statement of operations. forfeitures are required to be
estimated at the time of grant in order to estimate the portion of the award
that will ultimately vest. the estimate is based on our historical rates of
forfeiture.

pension
benefits—we sponsor both funded and unfunded u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit
pension plans covering the majority of our employees and retirees. we recognize
changes in the fair value of plan assets and net actuarial gains or losses in
excess of 10 percent of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets
or the plans’ projected benefit obligation (the corridor) annually in the
fourth quarter each year (mtm adjustment). the remaining components of pension
expense, primarily service and interest costs and assumed return on plan
assets, are recorded on a quarterly basis (on-going pension expense). 

foreign
currency translation—assets and liabilities of subsidiaries operating
outside the united states with a functional currency other than u.s. dollars
are translated into u.s. dollars using year-end exchange rates. sales, costs
and expenses are translated at the average exchange rates in effect during the
year. foreign currency translation gains and losses are included as a component
of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). for subsidiaries operating in
highly inflationary environments, inventories and property, plant and
equipment, including related expenses, are remeasured at the exchange rate in
effect on the date the assets were acquired, while monetary assets and
liabilities are remeasured at year-end exchange rates. remeasurement
adjustments for these subsidiaries are included in earnings.

derivative
financial instruments—as a result of our global operating and financing
activities, we are exposed to market risks from changes in interest and foreign
currency exchange rates and commodity prices, which may adversely affect our
operating results and financial position. we minimize our risks from interest
and foreign currency exchange rate and commodity price fluctuations through our
normal operating and financing activities and, when deemed appropriate through
the use of derivative financial instruments. derivative financial instruments
are used to manage risk and are not used for trading or other speculative
purposes and we do not use leveraged derivative financial instruments.
derivative financial instruments used for hedging purposes must be designated
and effective as a hedge of the identified risk exposure at the inception of
the contract. accordingly, changes in fair value of the derivative contract
must be highly correlated with changes in fair value of the underlying hedged item
at inception of the hedge and over the life of the hedge contract.

all
derivatives are recorded on the balance sheet as assets or liabilities and
measured at fair value. for derivatives designated as hedges of the fair value
of assets or liabilities, the changes in fair values of both the derivatives
and the hedged items are recorded in current earnings. for derivatives
designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the changes in fair
value of the derivatives are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss) and subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged items impact
earnings. cash flows of such derivative financial instruments are classified
consistent with the underlying hedged item.

transfers
of financial instruments—sales, transfers and securitization of financial
instruments are accounted for under authoritative guidance for the transfers
and servicing of financial assets and extinguishments of liabilities. 

we sell
interests in designated pools of trade accounts receivables to third parties.
the terms of the trade accounts receivable program permit the repurchase of
receivables from the third parties at our discretion. as a 

62



result, these program receivables are not accounted for as a sale and
remain on the consolidated balance sheet with a corresponding amount recorded
as either short-term borrowings or long-term debt. 

at times we
also transfer trade and other receivables that qualify as a sale and are thus
are removed from the consolidated balance sheet at the time they are sold. the
value assigned to any subordinated interests and undivided interests retained
in receivables sold is based on the relative fair values of the interests
retained and sold. the carrying value of the retained interests approximates
fair value due to the short-term nature of the collection period for the
receivables.

income
taxes—deferred tax liabilities or assets reflect temporary differences
between amounts of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting. such
amounts are adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect changes in tax rates expected
to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. a valuation allowance
is established to offset any deferred tax assets if, based upon the available
evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax
assets will not be realized. the determination of the amount of a valuation
allowance to be provided on recorded deferred tax assets involves estimates
regarding (1) the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary
differences, (2) expected future taxable income, and (3) the impact of tax
planning strategies. in assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we
consider all available positive and negative evidence, including past operating
results, projections of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing
tax planning strategies. the projections of future taxable income include a
number of estimates and assumptions regarding our volume, pricing and costs. additionally,
valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes
to tax laws.

significant
judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax
positions. we establish additional reserves for income taxes when, despite the
belief that tax positions are fully supportable, there remain certain positions
that do not meet the minimum recognition threshold. the approach for evaluating
certain and uncertain tax positions is defined by the authoritative guidance
and this guidance determines when a tax position is more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority. in the normal
course of business, the tax filings of the company and its subsidiaries are
examined by various federal, state and foreign tax authorities. we regularly
assess the potential outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations
for the current or prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for
income taxes. we continually assess the likelihood and amount of potential
adjustments and adjust the income tax provision, the current tax liability and
deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision
become known.

earnings
per share—basic earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of
common shares outstanding. diluted earnings per share is based on the weighted
average number of common shares outstanding and all dilutive potential common
shares outstanding.

use
of estimates—the preparation of consolidated financial statements
in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management
to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the
financial statements and related disclosures in the accompanying notes. actual
results could differ from those estimates. estimates and assumptions are
periodically reviewed and the effects of revisions are reflected in the
consolidated financial statements in the period they are determined to be necessary.

reclassifications—certain prior year amounts have
been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.

recent
accounting pronouncements—changes to accounting principles generally accepted
in the united states of america (u.s. gaap) are established by the financial
accounting standards board (fasb) in the form of accounting standards updates
(asu’s) to the fasb’s accounting standards codification.


the company
considers the applicability and impact of all asu’s. asu’s not listed below
were assessed and determined to be either not applicable or are expected to
have minimal impact on our consolidated financial position and results of
operations. 

in may
2011, the fasb issued amendments to disclosure requirements for common fair
value measurement. these amendments, effective for the interim and annual
periods beginning on or after december 15, 2011 (early adoption is prohibited),
result in common definition of fair value and common requirements for measurement
of and disclosure requirements between u.s. gaap and ifrs. consequently, the
amendments change some fair value measurement principles and disclosure
requirements. the implementation of this amended accounting guidance is not
expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position and
results of operations. 

63



in june
2011, the fasb issued amendments to disclosure requirements for presentation of
comprehensive income. this guidance, effective retrospectively for the interim
and annual periods beginning on or after december 15, 2011 (early adoption is
permitted), requires presentation of total comprehensive
income, the components of net income, and the components of other comprehensive
income either in a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in
two separate but consecutive statements. in december 2011, the fasb issued an
amendment to defer the presentation on the face of the financial statements the
effects of reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive income on
the components of net income and other comprehensive income for annual and
interim financial statements. the implementation of the two aforementioned
amendments is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated
financial position and results of operations. 

in
september 2011, the fasb issued amendments to the goodwill impairment guidance
which provides an option for companies to use a qualitative approach to test
goodwill for impairment if certain conditions are met. the amendments are
effective for annual and interim goodwill impairment tests performed for fiscal
years beginning after december 15, 2011 (early adoption is permitted). the
implementation of amended accounting guidance is not expected to have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position and results of
operations.

note 2. acquisitions
and divestitures

acquisitions
– we
acquired businesses for an aggregate cost of $973, $1,303, and $468 million in
2011 2010 and 2009, respectively. for all of our acquisitions the acquired
businesses were recorded at their estimated fair values at the dates of
acquisition. significant acquisitions made in these years are discussed below.

in december
2011, the company acquired king’s safetywear limited (ksw), a leading
international provider of branded safety footwear. the aggregate value, net of
cash acquired, was approximately $331 million (including the assumption of debt
of $33 million) and was allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets
acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the
acquisition date. on a preliminary basis, the company has assigned
approximately $178 million to identifiable intangible assets, predominantly
trademarks, technology, and customer relationships. the definite lived
intangible assets are being amortized over their estimated lives, using
straight-line and accelerated amortization methods. the value assigned to
trademarks of approximately $91 million is classified as indefinite lived
intangibles. the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of
net assets acquired (approximately $163 million), was recorded as goodwill.
this goodwill arises primarily from the avoidance of the time and costs which
would be required (and the associated risks that would be encountered) to
enhance our product offerings to key target markets and serve as entry into new
and profitable segments, and the expected cost synergies that will be realized
through the consolidation of the acquired business into our automation and
control solutions segment. their cost synergies are expected to be realized
principally in the areas of selling, general and administrative expenses,
material sourcing and manufacturing. this goodwill is non–deductible for tax
purposes.

the results
from the acquisition date through december 31, 2011 are included in the
automation and control solutions segment and were not material to the
consolidated financial statements. as of december 31, 2011, the purchase accounting
for ksw is subject to final adjustment primarily for the valuation of
inventory, property, plant and equipment, useful lives of intangible assets,
amounts allocated to intangible assets and goodwill, tax balances, and for
certain pre-acquisition contingencies.

in august
2011, the company acquired 100 percent of the issued and outstanding shares of
ems technologies, inc. (ems), a leading provider of connectivity solutions for
mobile networking, rugged mobile computers and satellite communications. ems
had reported 2010 revenues of approximately $355 million.

the
aggregate value, net of cash acquired, was approximately $513 million and was
allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and
liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition
date. on a preliminary basis, the company has assigned approximately $119
million to identifiable intangible assets, of which approximately $89 million
and approximately $30 million were recorded within the aerospace and automation
and control segments, respectively. the intangible assets are predominantly
customer relationships, existing technology and trademarks. these intangible
assets are being amortized over their estimated lives, using straight-line and
accelerated amortization methods. the excess of the purchase price over the
estimated fair values of net assets acquired (approximating $326 million), was
recorded as goodwill. this goodwill arises primarily from the avoidance of the
time and costs which would be required (and the 

64



associated risks that would be encountered) to enhance our product
offerings to key target markets and serve as entry into new and profitable
segments, and the expected cost synergies that will be realized through the consolidation
of the acquired business into our aerospace and automation and control
solutions segments. these cost synergies are expected to be realized
principally in the areas of selling, general and administrative expenses,
material sourcing and manufacturing. this goodwill is non-deductible for tax
purposes. 

the results
from the acquisition date through december 31, 2011 are included in the
aerospace and automation and control solutions segments and were not material
to the consolidated financial statements. as of december 31, 2011, the purchase
accounting for ems is subject to final adjustment primarily for the valuation
of inventory and property, plant and equipment, useful lives of intangible
assets, amounts allocated to intangible assets and goodwill, and for certain
pre-acquisition contingencies.

in october
2010, we completed the acquisition of the issued and outstanding shares of
sperian protection (sperian), a french company that operates globally in the
personal protection equipment design and manufacturing industry. sperian had
reported 2009 revenues of approximately $900 million. 

the
aggregate value, net of cash acquired, was approximately $1,475 million
(including the assumption of approximately $326 million of outstanding debt)
and was allocated to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and
liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition
date.

the
following amounts represent the final determination of the fair value of the
identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
117
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
inventories
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
166
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other current assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
property, plant and equipment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
intangible assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
539
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other assets and deferred charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts payable
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(63
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(114
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(156
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(326
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other long-term liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(64
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net assets
acquired
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
219
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
goodwill
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
930
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
purchase
price
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,149
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


we
have assigned $539 million to intangible assets, predominantly customer
relationships, trade names, and technology. these intangible assets are being
amortized over their estimated lives which range from 3 to 20 years using straight
line and accelerated amortization methods. included in this amount, a value of
approximately $246 million has been assigned to trade names intangibles
determined to have indefinite lives. the excess
of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired is
approximately $930 million and was recorded as goodwill. this goodwill arises
primarily from the avoidance of the time and costs which would be required (and
the associated risks that would be encountered) to develop a business with a
product offering and customer base comparable to sperian and the expected cost
synergies that will be realized through the consolidation of the acquired
business into our automations and controls solutions segment. these cost
synergies are expected to be realized principally in the areas of selling,
general and administrative expenses, material sourcing and manufacturing. this
goodwill is non-deductible for tax purposes. the results from the acquisition
date through december 31, 2010 are included in the automation and control
solutions segment and were not material to the consolidated financial
statements.

in august
2009, the company completed the acquisition of the rmg group (rmg regel +
messtechnik gmbh), a natural gas measuring and control products, services and
integrated solutions company, for a purchase price of approximately $416
million, net of cash acquired. the purchase price for the acquisition was
allocated to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and
liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition
date. the company has assigned $174 million to identifiable intangible assets,
predominantly customer relationships, existing technology and trademarks. these
intangible assets are being 

65



amortized over their estimated lives which range from 1 to 15 years
using straight-line and accelerated amortization methods. the excess of the
purchase price over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired
(approximating $225 million), was recorded as goodwill. this goodwill is
non-deductible for tax purposes. the results from the acquisition date through
december 31, 2009 are included in the automation and control solutions segment
and were not material to the consolidated financial statements.

in
connection with all acquisitions in 2011, 2010 and 2009, the amounts recorded
for transaction costs and the costs of integrating the acquired businesses into
honeywell were not material.

the pro
forma results for 2011, 2010 and 2009, assuming these acquisitions had been
made at the beginning of the comparable prior year, would not be materially
different from consolidated reported results.

divestitures–in july 2011, the company sold its
consumer products group business (cpg) to rank group limited. the sale was
completed for approximately $955 million in cash proceeds, resulting in a
pre-tax gain of approximately $301 million and approximately $178 million net of tax. the gain was recorded in net income from
discontinued operations after taxes in the company’s consolidated statement of
operations for the year ended december 31, 2011. the net income attributable to
the non-controlling interest for the discontinued operations is insignificant.
the sale of cpg, which had been part of the transportation systems segment, is
consistent with the company’s strategic focus on its portfolio of
differentiated global technologies.

the key
components of income from discontinued operations related to cpg were as
follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
530
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,020
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
957
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
costs, expenses and other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
421
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
798
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
752
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
63
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
99
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
120
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other (income) expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(loss) income before taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
121
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
85
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gain on disposal of discontinued operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
301
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income from discontinued operations before taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
349
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
121
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
85
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
140
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
43
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net income from discontinued operations after taxes
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
56
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 



the
components of assets and liabilities classified as discontinued operations and
included in other current assets and other current liabilities related to the
cpg business consisted of the following:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts, notes and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
227
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
inventories
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
136
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
property, plant and equipment - net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
116
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
goodwill and other intangibles - net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
359
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total assets
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
841
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accounts payable
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
145
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued and other liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
190
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


note 3. repositioning and other charges

66



a summary
of repositioning and other charges follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
severance
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
246
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
144
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
197 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asset impairments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
86
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exit costs
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reserve adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(30
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(53
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total net repositioning charge
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
354
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
149
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
160 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


 
  
 



 
 
asbestos related litigation charges, net of insurance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
149
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
175
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
155 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
probable and reasonably estimable environmental liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
240
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
212
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
145 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
62
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total net repositioning and
other charges
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
743
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
598
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
467 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


the
following table summarizes the pretax distribution of total net repositioning
and other charges by income statement classification:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cost of products and services sold
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
646
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
558
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
404 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selling, general and administrative expenses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
97
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
63 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
743
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
598
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
467 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


the
following table summarizes the pretax impact of total net repositioning and
other charges by segment:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december
31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
31 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
191
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
79
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
70 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
41
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
228
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
178
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
162 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
254
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
291
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
195 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
743
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
598
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
467 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


in
2011, we recognized repositioning charges totaling $380 million including
severance costs of $246 million related to workforce reductions of 3,188
manufacturing and administrative positions across all of our segments. the
workforce reductions were primarily related to the planned shutdown of a
manufacturing facility in our transportation systems segment, cost savings
actions taken in connection with our ongoing functional transformation and
productivity initiatives, factory transitions in connection with
acquisition-related synergies in our automation and control solutions and
aerospace segments, the exit from and/or rationalization of certain product
lines and markets in our performance materials and technologies and automation
and control solutions segments, the consolidation of repair facilities in our
aerospace segment, and factory consolidations and/or rationalizations and
organizational realignments of businesses in our automation and control
solutions segment. the repositioning charges included asset impairments of $86
million principally related to the write-off of certain intangible assets in
our automation and control solutions segment due to a change in branding strategy
and manufacturing plant and equipment associated with the planned shutdown of a
manufacturing facility and the exit of a product line and a factory transition
as discussed above. the repositioning charges also included exit costs of $48
million principally for costs to terminate contracts related to the exit of a
market and product line and a factory transition as discussed above. exit costs
also included closure obligations associated with the planned shutdown of a
manufacturing facility and exit of a product line also as discussed above.
also, $26 million of previously established accruals, primarily for severance
at our aerospace and automation and control solutions segments, were returned
to income in 2011 due principally to fewer employee separations than originally
planned associated with prior severance programs. 

67




in
2010, we recognized repositioning charges totaling $179 million including
severance costs of $144 million related to workforce reductions of 2,781
manufacturing and administrative positions primarily in our automation and
control solutions, aerospace and transportation systems segments. the workforce
reductions were primarily related to the planned shutdown of certain
manufacturing facilities in our automation and control solutions and
transportation systems segments, cost savings actions taken in connection with
our ongoing functional transformation and productivity initiatives, factory
transitions in our aerospace, automation and control solutions and performance
materials and technologies segments to more cost-effective locations, achieving
acquisition-related synergies in our automation and control solutions segment,
and the exit and/or rationalization of certain product lines in our performance
materials and technologies segment. the repositioning charge also included
asset impairments of $21 million principally related to manufacturing plant and
equipment associated with the exit and/or rationalization of certain product
lines and in facilities scheduled to close. also, $30 million of previously
established accruals, primarily for severance at our automation and control
solutions, transportation systems and aerospace segments, were returned to
income in 2010 due to fewer employee separations than originally planned
associated with prior severance programs.

in
2009, we recognized repositioning charges totaling $213 million primarily for
severance costs related to workforce reductions of 4,145 manufacturing and
administrative positions mainly in our automation and control solutions,
transportation systems and aerospace segments. the workforce reductions were
primarily related to the adverse market conditions experienced by many of our
businesses, cost savings actions taken in connection with our ongoing
functional transformation initiative, the planned downsizing or shutdown of
certain manufacturing facilities, and organizational realignments of portions
of our aerospace and transportation systems segments. also, $53 million of
previously established accruals, primarily for severance at our automation and
control solutions, aerospace, and transportation systems segments, were
returned to income in 2009 due to fewer employee separations than originally
planned associated with prior severance programs and changes in the scope of
previously announced repositioning actions.

the
following table summarizes the status of our total repositioning reserves:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
severance
costs
 
 
  
 
 
asset
impairments
 
 
  
 
 
exit
costs
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2008
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
358
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
394
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
2009 charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
213
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2009 usage - cash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(186
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(193
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
2009 usage - noncash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(51
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(53
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
divestitures(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(24
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(24
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
294
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
37
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
331
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
2010 charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
144
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
179
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2010 usage - cash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(130
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(17
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(147
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
2010 usage - noncash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(21
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(21
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(30
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(30
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
foreign currency translation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
270
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
34
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
304
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
2011 charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
246
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
86
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
380
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2011 usage - cash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(136
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(23
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(159
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
2011 usage - noncash
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(86
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(86
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
foreign currency translation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
353
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
412
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

(1) relates to businesses
divested during 2009 included in gain on sale of non-strategic businesses and
assets see note 4, other (income) expense. 

certain
repositioning projects in our aerospace, automation and control solutions and
transportation systems segments included exit or disposal activities, the costs
related to which will be recognized in future periods when the actual liability
is incurred. the nature of these exit or disposal costs includes asset set-up
and moving, product recertification and requalification, and employee
retention, training and travel. the following tables 

68




summarize by segment,
expected, incurred and remaining exit and disposal costs related to 2011 and
2010 repositioning actions which we were not able to recognize at the time the
actions were initiated.



 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2011
repositioning actions
 
 
  
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
automation and
control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
transportation
systems
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
expected exit and disposal costs
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
37
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
costs incurred year ended
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
remaining exit and disposal
costs at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2010
repositioning actions
 
 
  
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
automation and
control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
transportation
systems
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected exit and disposal costs
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
23
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
costs incurred year ended
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
costs incurred year ended
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
— 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
 
 
remaining exit and disposal
costs at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
17 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


in
2011, we recognized a charge of $240 million for environmental liabilities
deemed probable and reasonably estimable during the year. we recognized
asbestos related litigation charges, net of insurance, of $149 million.
environmental and asbestos matters are discussed in detail in note 21,
commitments and contingencies. 

in
2010, we recognized a charge of $212 million for environmental liabilities
deemed probable and reasonably estimable during the year. we recognized asbestos
related litigation charges, net of insurance, of $175 million. we also
recognized other charges of $62 million in connection with the evaluation of
potential resolution of certain legal matters.

in 2009, we
recognized a charge of $145 million for environmental liabilities deemed
probable and reasonably estimable during the year. we recognized asbestos
related litigation charges, net of insurance, of $155 million.

note 4. other (income) expense


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
equity (income)/loss of affiliated companies
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(51
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(28
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
gain on sale of non-strategic businesses and assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(61
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(87
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
interest income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(58
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(39
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(33
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
50
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other, net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(42
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
47
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(84
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(97
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(54
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 

gain
on sale of non-strategic businesses and assets for 2011 includes a $50 million
pre-tax gain, $31 million net of tax, related to the divestiture of the
automotive on-board sensor products business within our automation and control
solutions segment. 

other,
net in 2011 includes a loss of $29 million resulting from early redemption of
debt in the first quarter of 2011. see note 14 long-term debt and credit
agreements for further details. 

69



other,
net for 2010 includes a $62 million pre-tax gain, $39 million net of tax,
related to the consolidation of a joint venture within our performance
materials and technologies segment. the company obtained control and the
ability to direct those activities most significant to the joint venture’s
economic performance in the third quarter, resulting in consolidation.
accordingly, we have i) recognized the assets and liabilities at fair value,
ii) included the results of operations in the consolidated financial statements
from the date of consolidation and iii) recognized the above noted gain
representing the difference between the carrying amount and fair value of our
previously held equity method investment. the company has assigned $24 million
to intangibles, predominantly the joint venture’s customer contracts. these
intangible assets are being amortized over their estimated lives using the
straight line method. the excess of the book value over the estimated fair
values of the net assets consolidated approximating $132 million, was recorded
as goodwill. this goodwill is non-deductible for tax purposes. the results from
the consolidation date through december 31, 2010 are included in the
performance materials and technologies segment and were not material to the
consolidated financial statements. 

gain
on sale of non-strategic businesses and assets for 2009 includes a $50 million
pre-tax gain, $42 million net of tax, related to the deconsolidation of a
subsidiary within our automation and control solutions segment. the subsidiary
achieved contractual milestones at december 31, 2009 and as a result, we are no
longer the primary beneficiary, resulting in deconsolidation. we continue to
hold a non-controlling interest which was recorded at its estimated fair value
of $67 million upon deconsolidation. the fair value was estimated using a
combination of a market and income approaches utilizing observable market data
for comparable businesses and discounted cash flow modeling. our
non-controlling interest, classified within investments and long-term
receivables on our balance sheet will be accounted for under the equity method
on a prospective basis. 

other,
net for 2009 includes an other than-temporary impairment charge of $62 million.
see note 16 financial instruments and fair value measures for further details. 

note 5. interest and other financial charges


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
total interest and other financial charges
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
389
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
402
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
473
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
less—capitalized interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(16
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(15
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
376
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
386
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
458
 
 
  
 
 


 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


the
weighted average interest rate on short-term borrowings and commercial paper
outstanding at december 31, 2011 and 2010 was 0.84 percent and 1.64 percent,
respectively.

note 6. income taxes

income from continuing operations before taxes


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
united states
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
318
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,068
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,964
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,565
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
896
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,722
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,964
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

70







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tax expense
(benefit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
united states
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
358
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
272
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
414
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
407
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
164
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
765
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
436
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
tax expense consists of current:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
united states
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
171
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(501
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(47
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
state
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
564
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
385
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
748
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(113
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
389
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
united states
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(185
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
784
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
283
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
state
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
72
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
17
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(150
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(253
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(331
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
878
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
47
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
765
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
436
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
the u.s. statutory federal
income tax rate is reconciled to our effective income tax rate as follows:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
statutory u.s. federal income
tax rate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35.0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35.0
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35.0
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
taxes on foreign earnings
below u.s. tax rate(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(10.4
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7.3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8.3
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
state income taxes(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.5
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
manufacturing incentives
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.7
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.6
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
esop dividend tax benefit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.1
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
tax credits
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2.3
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1.9
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
audit settlements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2.0
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.7
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
all other items—net
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.8
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.7
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18.3
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28.1
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22.2
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

(1) net of changes in valuation
allowance and tax reserves

the
effective tax rate decreased by 9.8 percentage points in 2011 compared with
2010 primarily due to a change in the mix of earnings related to higher u.s.
pension expense (primarily driven by an approximate 7.6 percentage point
impact which resulted from the increase in pension mark-to-market expense),
an increased benefit from manufacturing incentives, an increased benefit
from the favorable settlement of tax audits and an increased benefit from
a lower foreign effective tax rate. the foreign effective tax rate was 21.1
percent, a decrease of approximately 4.9 percentage points which primarily
consisted of (i) a 5.1 percent impact from decreased valuation allowances
on net operating losses primarily due to an increase in german earnings available
to be offset by net operating loss carry forwards; (ii) a 2.4 percent impact
from tax benefits related to foreign exchange and investment losses; iii)
a 1.2 percent impact from an increased benefit in tax credits and lower statutory
tax rates and (iv) a 4.1 percent impact related to an increase in tax reserves.
the effective tax rate was lower than the u.s. statutory rate of 35 percent
primarily due to earnings taxed at lower foreign rates.

71





the
effective tax rate increased by 5.9 percentage points in 2010 compared to 2009
primarily due to a change in the mix of earnings related to lower u.s. pension
expense, the impact of an enacted change in the tax treatment of the medicare
part d program, the absence of manufacturing incentives, a decreased impact
from the settlement of audits and an increase in the foreign effective tax
rate. the foreign effective tax rate increased by approximately 7 percentage
points which primarily consisted of i) a 6 percentage point impact from the
absence of tax benefits related to foreign exchange and investment losses and
ii) a (0.1) percentage point impact from increased valuation allowances on net
operating losses.

deferred tax assets (liabilities)

deferred
income taxes represent the future tax effects of transactions which are
reported in different periods for tax and financial reporting purposes. the tax
effects of temporary differences and tax carryforwards which give rise to
future income tax benefits and payables are as follows:




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


december 31,




 


 

 


 





 


 


2011


 


2010




 


 

 


 



 

 


 





 
  
 





property, plant and
equipment basis differences


 


$


(1,097


)


 


$


(1,107


)




postretirement benefits
other than pensions and post employment benefits


 


 


571


 


 


 


674


 




investment and other asset
basis differences


 


 


(970


)


 


 


(993


)




other accrued items


 


 


2,852


 


 


 


2,348


 




net operating and capital
losses


 


 


810


 


 


 


873


 




tax credits


 


 


379


 


 


 


249


 




undistributed earnings of
subsidiaries


 


 


(57


)


 


 


(40


)




all other items—net


 


 


(67


)


 


 


15


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


2,421


 


 


 


2,019


 




valuation allowance


 


 


(591


)


 


 


(636


)




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


$


1,830


 


 


$


1,383


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 




there were
$3 million of u.s. federal tax net operating losses available for carryforward
at december 31, 2011 which have expiration dates through 2029. the company has
state tax net operating loss carryforwards of $3.5 billion at december 31, 2011
with varying expiration dates through 2032. we also have foreign net operating
and capital losses of $2.7 billion which are available to reduce future income
tax payments in several countries, subject to varying expiration rules.

we have u.s.
federal tax credit carryforwards of $35 million at december 31, 2011, including
alternative minimum tax credits which are not subject to expiration. we also
have state tax credit carryforwards of $61 million at december 31, 2011,
including carryforwards of $38 million with various expiration dates through
2026 and tax credits of $23 million which are not subject to expiration. 

the
valuation allowance against deferred tax assets decreased by $45 million in
2011 and increased by $58 million and $133 million in 2010 and 2009,
respectively. the 2011 decrease in the valuation allowance was primarily due to
decreased foreign net operating losses related to the netherlands and germany,
partially offset by the increase in the valuation allowance of france,
luxembourg and canada. the 2010 increase in the valuation allowance was
primarily due to increased foreign net operating losses related to france,
luxembourg, and the netherlands offset by the reversal of a valuation allowance
related to germany. the 2010 increase in valuation allowance also includes
adjustments related to purchase accounting for various acquisitions. the 2009
increase in the valuation allowance was primarily due to increased foreign net
operating losses related to germany, luxembourg, and the netherlands.

federal
income taxes have not been provided on undistributed earnings of the majority
of our international subsidiaries as it is our intention to reinvest these
earnings into the respective subsidiaries. at december 31, 2011 honeywell has
not provided for u.s. federal income and foreign withholding taxes on
approximately $8.1 billion of such earnings of our non-u.s. operations. it is
not practicable to estimate the amount of tax that might be payable if some or
all of such earnings were to be repatriated, and the amount of foreign tax
credits that would be available to reduce or eliminate the resulting u.s.
income tax liability.

we had $815
million, $757 million and $720 million of unrecognized tax benefits as of
december 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009 respectively. if recognized, $815 million
would be recorded as a component of income tax 

72



expense as of december 31, 2011. for the years ended december 31, 2011
and 2010, the company increased its unrecognized tax benefits by $58 million
and $37 million, respectively, due to additional reserves for various
international and u.s. tax audit matters, partially offset by adjustments
related to our ongoing assessments of the likelihood and amount of potential
outcomes of current and future examinations, the expiration of various statute
of limitations, and settlements with tax authorities. the following table
summarizes the activity related to our unrecognized tax benefits:




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 


 



 

 


 



 

 


 





change in unrecognized tax
benefits:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




balance at beginning of year


 


$


757


 


 


$


720


 


 


$


671


 




gross increases related to
current period tax positions


 


 


46


 


 


 


37


 


 


 


86


 




gross increases related to
prior periods tax positions


 


 


327


 


 


 


84


 


 


 


86


 




gross decreases related to
prior periods tax positions


 


 


(56


)


 


 


(41


)


 


 


(77


)




decrease related to
settlements with tax authorities


 


 


(237


)


 


 


(23


)


 


 


(44


)




expiration of the statute of
limitations for the assessment of taxes


 


 


(12


)


 


 


(8


)


 


 


(8


)




foreign currency translation


 


 


(10


)


 


 


(12


)


 


 


6


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





balance at end of year


 


$


815


 


 


$


757


 


 


$


720


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 




generally, our uncertain tax positions are related to tax years that
remain subject to examination by the relevant tax authorities. the following
table summarizes these open tax years by major jurisdiction as of december 31,
2011:




 


 


 


 


 




 


 


open tax year




 


 

 





jurisdiction


 


examination in
progress


 


examination not yet
initiated



 



 

 



 

 





united states (1)


 


2001–2009


 


2005–2011




united kingdom


 


n/a


 


2010-2011




canada(1)


 


2006-2010


 


2011




germany(1)


 


2004-2009


 


2010-2011




france


 


2009-2010


 


2000–2008, 2011




netherlands


 


2007-2009


 


2010-2011




australia


 


n/a


 


2009-2011




china


 


2009-2010


 


2006-2008, 2011




india


 


2000–2009


 


2010-2011









 


 




(1)


includes federal as well as state,
provincial or similar local jurisdictions, as applicable.



based on the
outcome of these examinations, or as a result of the expiration of statute of
limitations for specific jurisdictions, it is reasonably possible that the
related unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions taken regarding previously
filed tax returns will materially change from those recorded as liabilities for
uncertain tax positions in our financial statements. in addition, the outcome
of these examinations may impact the valuation of certain deferred tax assets
(such as net operating losses) in future periods. based on the number of tax
years currently under audit by the relevant u.s federal, state and foreign tax
authorities, the company anticipates that several of these audits may be
finalized in the foreseeable future. however, based on the status of these
examinations, the protocol of finalizing audits by the relevant taxing
authorities, and the possibility that the company might challenge certain audit
findings (which could include formal legal proceedings), at this time it is not
possible to estimate the impact of any amount of such changes, if any, to
previously recorded uncertain tax positions.

unrecognized
tax benefits for examinations in progress were $482 million, $274 million and
$261 million, as of december 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. these
increases are primarily due to an increase in tax examinations. estimated
interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes are
classified as a component of tax expense in the consolidated statement of operations
and totaled $63 million, $33 million and $13 million for the years ended
december 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. accrued interest and penalties
were $247 million, $183 million and $150 million, as of december 31, 2011,
2010, and 2009, respectively.

73



note 7. earnings per share

the details
of the earnings per share calculations for the years ended december 31, 2011,
2010 and 2009 are as follows:




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 


 

 



 


 

 


 





basic


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




income from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the non controlling interest


 


$


1,858


 


 


$


1,944


 


 


$


1,492 


 




income from discontinued
operations


 


 


209


 


 


 


78


 


 


 


56 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





net income attributable to
honeywell


 


$


2,067


 


 


$


2,022


 


 


$


1,548 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




weighted average shares
outstanding


 


 


780.8


 


 


 


773.5


 


 


 


752.6 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





earnings per share of common
stock:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




income from continuing
operations


 


$


2.38


 


 


$


2.51


 


 


$


1.99 


 




income from discontinued
operations


 


 


0.27


 


 


 


0.10


 


 


 


0.07 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





net income attributable to
honeywell


 


$


2.65


 


 


$


2.61


 


 


$


2.06 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


years ended december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010


 


2009




 


 

 



 

 



 

 





assuming dilution


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




income from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest


 


$


1,858


 


 


$


1,944


 


 


$


1,492 


 




income from discontinued
operations


 


 


209


 


 


 


78


 


 


 


56 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





net income attributable to
honeywell


 


$


2,067


 


 


$


2,022


 


 


$


1,548 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




average shares


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




weighted average shares
outstanding


 


 


780.8


 


 


 


773.5


 


 


 


752.6 


 




dilutive securities issuable -
stock plans


 


 


10.8


 


 


 


7.4


 


 


 


3.1 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





total weighted average diluted
shares outstanding


 


 


791.6


 


 


 


780.9


 


 


 


755.7 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




earnings per share of common
stock - assuming dilution:


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




income from continuing
operations


 


$


2.35


 


 


$


2.49


 


 


$


1.98 


 




income from discontinuing
operations


 


 


0.26


 


 


 


0.10


 


 


 


0.07 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





net income attributable to
honeywell


 


$


2.61


 


 


$


2.59


 


 


$


2.05 


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 




the diluted
earnings per share calculations exclude the effect of stock options when the
options’ assumed proceeds exceed the average market price of the common shares
during the period. in 2011, 2010, and 2009 the weighted number of stock options
excluded from the computations were 9.5, 14.8, and 34.0 million, respectively.
these stock options were outstanding at the end of each of the respective
periods.

note
8. accounts, notes and other receivables




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


december 31,




 


 

 





 


 


2011


 


2010




 


 

 


 



 

 


 





trade


 


$


6,926


 


 


$


6,471


 




other


 


 


555


 


 


 


642


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


 


7,481


 


 


 


7,113


 




less
- allowance for doubtful accounts


 


 


(253


)


 


 


(272


)




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 





 


 


$


7,228


 


 


$


6,841


 




 


 

 


 


 



 

 


 


 




74





trade
receivables includes $1,404, and $1,307 million of unbilled balances under
long-term contracts as of december 31, 2011 and december 31, 2010,
respectively. these amounts are billed in accordance with the terms of customer
contracts to which they relate.

note 9. inventories


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
raw materials
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,222
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,139
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
work in process
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
792
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
finished products
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,253
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,045
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,433
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,976
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reduction to lifo cost basis
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(169
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(154
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,264
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,822
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


inventories
valued at lifo amounted to $302 and $198 million at december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. had such lifo inventories been valued at current costs, their
carrying values would have been approximately $169 and $154 million higher at
december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.

note 10. investments and long-term receivables


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
362
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
413
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term trade and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
81
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
83
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term financing receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
120
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
616
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

long-term
trade and other receivables include $29 and $19 million of unbilled balances
under long-term contracts as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. these
amounts are billed in accordance with the terms of the customer contracts to
which they relate.

the
following table summarizes long term trade, financing and other receivables by
segment, including current portions and allowances for credit losses.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
136
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

allowance
for credit losses for the above detailed long-term trade, financing and other
receivables totaled $5 million and $7 million as of december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. the receivables are evaluated for impairment on an individual
basis, including consideration of credit quality. the above detailed financing
receivables are predominately with commercial and governmental counterparties
of investment grade credit quality.

75



note 11. property, plant and equipment


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
land and improvements
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
376
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
375
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
machinery and equipment
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,937
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,878
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
buildings and improvements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,897
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,750
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
construction in progress
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
513
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
398
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,723
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,401
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
less—accumulated depreciation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8,919
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8,677
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,804
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,724
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


depreciation expense was $699, $707 and $686 million in 2011, 2010 and
2009, respectively.

note 12. goodwill and
other intangible assets - net

the
change in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended december 31, 2011
and 2010 by segment is as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
divestitures
 
 
  
 
 
currency
translation
adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,883
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
212
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,095
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,907
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
365
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(12
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,260
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,291
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,306
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
194
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  


 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11,275
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
592
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(12
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
gross
carrying
amount
 
 
  
 
 
accumulated
amortization
 
 
  
 
 
net
carrying
amount
 
 
  
 
 
gross
carrying
amount
 
 
  
 
 
accumulated
amortization
 
 
  
 
 
net
carrying
amount
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
determinable life intangibles:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
patents and technology
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,151
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(761
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
390
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,101
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(676
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
425
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
customer relationships
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,718
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(493
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,225
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,688
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(399
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,289
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
trademarks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
155
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(84
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
186
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(84
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
102
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
211
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(145
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
66
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
512
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(404
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,235
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,483
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,752
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,487
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,563
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,924
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
indefinite life intangibles:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
trademarks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
725
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
725
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
613
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
613
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,960
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,483
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,477
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,100
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,563
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,537
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  


 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

intangible
assets amortization expense was $249, $263, and $250 million in 2011, 2010,
2009, respectively. estimated intangible asset amortization expense for each of
the next five years approximates $250 million in 2012, $226 million in 2013,
$200 million in 2014, $166 million in 2015, and $141 in 2016.

note 13. accrued
liabilities

76








 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
  
 
compensation, benefit and
other employee related
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,555
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,363
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
customer advances and deferred
income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,914
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,703
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
237
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
162
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
repositioning
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
414
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
306
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
product warranties and
performance guarantees
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
367
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
380
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
environmental costs
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
303
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
328
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
318
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
466
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
accrued interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
116
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
other taxes (payroll, sales,
vat etc.)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
233
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
249
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
insurance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
180
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
179
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
other (primarily operating
expenses)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,234
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,194
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,863
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,446
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 


note 14. long -term
debt and credit agreements



 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
6.125% notes due 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
500
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.625% notes due 2012
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
4.25% notes due 2013
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3.875% notes due 2014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.40% notes due 2016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.30% notes due 2017
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.30% notes due 2018
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
900
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
900
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.00% notes due 2019
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
900
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
900
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
4.25% notes due 2021
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
800
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.375% notes due 2041
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
industrial development bond
obligations, floating 
rate maturing at various dates through 2037
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
37
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
46
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
6.625% debentures due 2028
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
216
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
216
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
9.065% debentures due 2033
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
51
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.70% notes due 2036
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
550
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
550
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5.70% notes due 2037
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
600
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other (including capitalized
leases), 0.6%-9.5% 
maturing at various dates through 2023
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
242
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
115
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,896
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,278
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
less: current portion
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(15
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(523
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,881
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,755
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 

77



the schedule of principal payments on long term debt is as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
2012
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2013
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
628
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
613
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2015
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
455
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
thereafter
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,184
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6,896
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
less-current portion
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(15
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,881
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

in
february 2011, the company issued $800 million 4.25 percent senior notes due
2021 and $600 million 5.375 percent senior notes due 2041 (collectively, the
“notes”). the notes are senior unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of
honeywell and rank equally with all of honeywell’s existing and future senior
unsecured debt and senior to all of honeywell’s subordinated debt. the offering
resulted in gross proceeds of $1,400 million, offset by $19 million in discount
and closing costs related to the offering. 

in
the first quarter of 2011, the company repurchased the entire outstanding
principal amount of its $400 million 5.625 percent notes due 2012 via a cash
tender offer and a subsequent optional redemption. the cost relating to the
early redemption of the notes, including the “make-whole premium”, was $29
million.

in
march 2011, the company entered into a $2,800 million five year credit
agreement (“credit agreement”) with a syndicate of banks. commitments under the
credit agreement can be increased pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement
to an aggregate amount not to exceed $3,500 million. the credit agreement
contains a $700 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. the
credit agreement is maintained for general corporate purposes, including
support for the issuance of commercial paper, and replaces the previous $2,800
million five year credit agreement dated may 14, 2007 (“prior agreement”).
there have been no borrowings under the credit agreement or the prior
agreement. 

the
credit agreement does not restrict our ability to pay dividends and contains no
financial covenants. the failure to comply with customary conditions or the
occurrence of customary events of default contained in the credit agreement
would prevent any further borrowings and would generally require the repayment
of any outstanding borrowings under the credit agreement. such events of
default include: (a) non-payment of credit agreement debt, interest or fees;
(b) non-compliance with the terms of the credit agreement covenants; (c)
cross-default to other debt in certain circumstances; (d) bankruptcy; and (e)
defaults upon obligations under employee retirement income security act. additionally,
each of the banks has the right to terminate its commitment to lend additional
funds or issue letters of credit under the agreement if any person or group
acquires beneficial ownership of 30 percent or more of our voting stock, or,
during any 12-month period, individuals who were directors of honeywell at the
beginning of the period cease to constitute a majority of the board of
directors.

loans
under the credit agreement are required to be repaid no later than march 31,
2016. we have agreed to pay a facility fee of 0.125 percent per annum on the
aggregate commitment.

interest
on borrowings under the credit agreement would be determined, at honeywell’s
option, by (a) a competitive bidding procedure; (b) the highest of the floating
base rate publicly announced by citibank, n.a. 0.5 percent above the federal
funds rate or libor plus 1 percent; or (c) the eurocurrency rate plus
honeywell’s credit default swap spread, subject to a floor and a cap
(applicable margin).

the
facility fee, the applicable margin over the eurocurrency rate and the letter
of credit issuance fee, are subject to change, based upon a grid determined by
our long term debt ratings. the credit agreement is not subject to termination
based upon a decrease in our debt ratings or a material adverse change.

in
the fourth quarter of 2011, the company repaid $500 million of its 6.125%
notes. the repayment was funded with cash provided by operating activities. 

78



in
the first quarter of 2010, the company repaid $1,000 million of its 7.50%
notes. the repayment was funded with cash provided by operating activities.

as
a source of liquidity, we sell interests in designated pools of trade accounts
receivables to third parties. as of december 31, 2011 and december 31, 2010,
none of the receivables in the designated pools had been sold to third parties.
when we sell receivables, they are over-collateralized and we retain a
subordinated interest in the pool of receivables representing that
over-collateralization as well as an undivided interest in the balance of the
receivables pools. the terms of the trade accounts receivable program permit
the repurchase of receivables from the third parties at our discretion,
providing us with an additional source of revolving credit. as a result,
program receivables remain on the company’s balance sheet with a corresponding
amount recorded as either short-term borrowings or long-term debt.

note 15. lease commitments

future
minimum lease payments under operating leases having initial or remaining
noncancellable lease terms in excess of one year are as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
at december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
2012
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
311
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2013
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
248
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
184
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2015
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
135
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
92
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
thereafter
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
243
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,213
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

we
have entered into agreements to lease land, equipment and buildings.
principally all our operating leases have initial terms of up to 25 years, and
some contain renewal options subject to customary conditions. at any time
during the terms of some of our leases, we may at our option purchase the
leased assets for amounts that approximate fair value. we do not expect that
any of our commitments under the lease agreements will have a material adverse
effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or
liquidity.

rent
expense was $386, $369 and $366 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

note 16. financial instruments and fair value
measures

credit and market risk—financial
instruments, including derivatives, expose us to counterparty credit risk for
nonperformance and to market risk related to changes in interest and currency
exchange rates and commodity prices. we manage our exposure to counterparty
credit risk through specific minimum credit standards, diversification of
counterparties, and procedures to monitor concentrations of credit risk. our
counterparties in derivative transactions are substantial investment and
commercial banks with significant experience using such derivative instruments.
we monitor the impact of market risk on the fair value and cash flows of our
derivative and other financial instruments considering reasonably possible
changes in interest rates, currency exchange rates and commodity prices and
restrict the use of derivative financial instruments to hedging activities.

we
continually monitor the creditworthiness of our customers to which we grant
credit terms in the normal course of business. the terms and conditions of our
credit sales are designed to mitigate or eliminate concentrations of credit
risk with any single customer. our sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or a small group of customers.

foreign currency risk
management—we conduct our business on a multinational basis in a
wide variety of foreign currencies. our exposure to market risk for changes in
foreign currency exchange rates arises from international financing activities
between subsidiaries, foreign currency denominated monetary assets and
liabilities and transactions arising from international trade. our objective is
to preserve the economic value of non-functional currency denominated cash
flows. we attempt to hedge transaction exposures with natural offsets to the
fullest extent possible and, once these opportunities have been exhausted,
through foreign currency exchange forward and option contracts with third
parties. 

79



we
hedge monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies.
prior to conversion into u.s. dollars, these assets and liabilities are
remeasured at spot exchange rates in effect on the balance sheet date. the
effects of changes in spot rates are recognized in earnings and included in
other (income) expense. we partially hedge forecasted sales and purchases, which
predominantly occur in the next twelve months and are denominated in
non-functional currencies, with currency forward contracts. changes in the
forecasted non-functional currency cash flows due to movements in exchange
rates are substantially offset by changes in the fair value of the currency
forward contracts designated as hedges. market value gains and losses on these
contracts are recognized in earnings when the hedged transaction is recognized.
open foreign currency exchange forward contracts mature predominantly in the
next twelve months. at december 31, 2011 and 2010, we had contracts with
notional amounts of $7,108 million and $5,733 million, respectively, to
exchange foreign currencies, principally the u.s. dollar, euro, british pound,
canadian dollar, hong kong dollar, mexican peso, swiss franc, czech koruna,
chinese renminbi, indian rupee, singapore dollar, swedish krona, korean won and
thai baht.

commodity price risk
management—our exposure to market risk for commodity prices can result
in changes in our cost of production. we primarily mitigate our exposure to
commodity price risk through the use of long-term, fixed-price contracts with
our suppliers and formula price agreements with suppliers and customers. we
also enter into forward commodity contracts with third parties designated as
hedges of anticipated purchases of several commodities. forward commodity
contracts are marked-to-market, with the resulting gains and losses recognized
in earnings when the hedged transaction is recognized. at december 31, 2011 and
2010, we had contracts with notional amounts of $59 million and $23 million,
respectively, related to forward commodity agreements, principally base metals
and natural gas. 

interest rate risk
management— we use a combination of financial instruments, including
long-term, medium-term and short-term financing, variable-rate commercial
paper, and interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate mix of our total
debt portfolio and related overall cost of borrowing. at december 31, 2011 and
2010, interest rate swap agreements designated as fair value hedges effectively
changed $1,400 and $600 million, respectively, of fixed rate debt at a rate of
4.09 and 3.88 percent, respectively, to libor based floating rate debt. our
interest rate swaps mature through 2021. 

fair value
of financial instruments— the fasb’s accounting guidance defines fair
value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer
a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the
measurement date (exit price). the fasb’s guidance classifies the inputs used
to measure fair value into the following hierarchy:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
level 1
 
 
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
level 2
 
 
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or
liabilities, or
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
unadjusted quoted prices for identical or similar assets or
liabilities in markets that are not active, or
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or
liability
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
level 3
 
 
unobservable inputs for the asset or liability
 
 
  
 
 

the company endeavors to utilize the best
available information in measuring fair value. financial and nonfinancial
assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest
level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. the company
has determined that our available for sale investments in marketable equity
securities are level 1 and our remaining financial assets and liabilities are
level 2 in the fair value hierarchy. the following table sets forth the
company’s financial assets and liabilities that were accounted for at fair
value on a recurring basis as of december 31, 2011 and 2010: 

80







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,2010  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange
contracts
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
359
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
322
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate swap agreements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forward commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
liabilities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange
contracts
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
52
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forward commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 

the
foreign currency exchange contracts, interest rate swap agreements, and forward
commodity contracts are valued using broker quotations, or market transactions
in either the listed or over-the-counter markets. as such, these derivative
instruments are classified within level 2. the company also holds investments
in commercial paper, certificates of deposits, and time deposits that are
designated as available for sale and are valued using market transactions in
over-the-counter markets. as such, these investments are classified within
level 2. 

the
carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, trade accounts and notes
receivables, payables, commercial paper and short-term borrowings contained in
the consolidated balance sheet approximates fair value. the following table
sets forth the company’s financial assets and liabilities that were not carried
at fair value:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
carrying
value
 
 
  
 
 
fair
value
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
carrying
value
 
 
  
 
 
fair
value
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term receivables
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
132
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
132
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
203
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
199
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
long-term debt and related
current maturities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,896
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7,896
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,278
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,835
 
 
  
 
 

in
the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, the company had assets with a net
book value of $262 million and $32 million, respectively, specifically
property, plant and equipment, software and intangible assets, which were
accounted for at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. these assets were tested
for impairment and based on the fair value of these assets the company
recognized losses of $127 million and $30 million, respectively, in the years
ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, primarily in connection with our
repositioning actions (see note 3 repositioning and other charges). the company
has determined that the fair value measurements of these nonfinancial assets
are level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.

the
company holds investments in marketable equity securities that are designated
as available for sale securities. due to an other-than-temporary decline in
fair value of these investments, the company recognized an impairment charge of
$62 million in the second quarter of 2009 that is included in other (income)
expense.

the
derivatives utilized for risk management purposes as detailed above are
included on the consolidated balance sheet and impacted the statement of
operations as follows:

81




fair value of derivatives classified as assets consist of the
following:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
designated as a hedge
 
 
  
 
 
balance sheet
classification
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accounts, notes, and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest rate swap agreements
 
 
  
 
 
other assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accounts, notes, and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
not designated as a
hedge
 
 
  
 
 
balance sheet
classification
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accounts, notes, and other receivables
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair value of derivatives classified as liabilities consist of the
following:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
designated as a hedge
 
 
  
 
 
balance sheet
classification
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
50
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
not designated as a
hedge
 
 
  
 
 
balance sheet
classification
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gains (losses) recognized in oci (effective portions) consist of the
following:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
designated
cash flow hedge
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(42
 
 
)
 
 
$
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(12
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(7
 
 
)
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gains (losses) reclassified from aoci to income consist of the
following:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
designated
cash flow hedge
 
 
  
 
 
income
statement location
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
foreign currency exchange contracts
 
 
  
 
 
product sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(19
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
cost of products sold
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
30
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
sales & general administrative
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
commodity contracts
 
 
  
 
 
cost of products sold
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
$
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 

ineffective
portions of commodity derivative instruments designated in cash flow hedge
relationships were insignificant in the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010
and are located in cost of products sold. 

82



interest
rate swap agreements are designated as hedge relationships with gains or
(losses) on the derivative recognized in interest and other financial charges
offsetting the gains and losses on the underlying debt being hedged. gains or
(losses) on interest rate swap agreements recognized in earnings were $112 and
$24 million in the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010 respectively. these
gains were fully offset by losses on the underlying debt being hedged. 

we
also economically hedge our exposure to changes in foreign exchange rates
principally with forward contracts. these contracts are marked-to-market with
the resulting gains and losses recognized in earnings offsetting the gains and
losses on the non-functional currency denominated monetary assets and
liabilities being hedged. we recognized $30 million of income and $18 million
of expense, in other (income) expense for the years ended december 31, 2011 and
2010, respectively. 

note 17. other liabilities


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
pension and other employee related
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,308
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,216
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
environmental
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
420
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
425
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income taxes
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
856
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
562
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
218
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
177
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asset retirement obligations(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
74
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
80
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
94
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
205
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
344
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,158
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,898
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1) asset retirement obligations primarily
relate to costs associated with the future retirement of nuclear fuel
conversion facilities in our performance materials and technologies segment
and the future retirement of facilities in our automation and control
solutions segment.
 
 

a
reconciliation of our liability for asset retirement obligations for the year
ended december 31, 2011, is as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 

 
  

 
 
 
 
change in asset retirement obligations:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
80
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
79
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
liabilities settled
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accretion expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance at end of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
74
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
80
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


note 18. capital stock

we
are authorized to issue up to 2,000,000,000 shares of common stock, with a par
value of $1. common shareowners are entitled to receive such dividends as may
be declared by the board, are entitled to one vote per share, and are entitled,
in the event of liquidation, to share ratably in all the assets of honeywell
which are available for distribution to the common shareowners. common
shareowners do not have preemptive or conversion rights. shares of common stock
issued and outstanding or held in the treasury are not liable to further calls
or assessments. there are no restrictions on us relative to dividends or the
repurchase or redemption of common stock.

the
board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to a total of $3.0
billion of honeywell common stock, which amount includes $1.9 billion that
remained available under the company’s previously reported share repurchase
program. we purchased a total of approximately 20.3 million shares of our
common stock in 2011 for $1,085 million. 

83



we
are authorized to issue up to 40,000,000 shares of preferred stock, without par
value, and can determine the number of shares of each series, and the rights,
preferences and limitations of each series. at december 31, 2011, there was no
preferred stock outstanding.

note 19. accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss)

total
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) is included in the consolidated
statement of shareowners’ equity. comprehensive income (loss) attributable to
non-controlling interest consisted predominantly of net income. the changes in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) are as follows: 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
pretax
 
 
  
 
 
tax
 
 
  
 
 
after tax
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
year ended
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(146
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(146
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(317
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
108
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(209
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(41
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(492
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
115
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(377
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
year ended
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(249
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(249
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
90
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(4
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(139
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
20
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(119
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
year ended
december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
259
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
259
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(407
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
136
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(271
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of available for sale investments (1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
30
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
128
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
130
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(1) includes reclassification adjustment for losses included in net
income
 
 









 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
components of
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
cumulative foreign exchange translation adjustment
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
74
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
220
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
pensions and other post retirement benefit adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,650
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,441
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in fair value of available for sale investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
163
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
151
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in fair value of effective cash flow hedges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(31
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,444
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,067
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


note 20. stock-based compensation plans

we
have stock-based compensation plans available to grant non-qualified stock
options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted units
and restricted stock to key employees. the 2011 stock incentive plan of
honeywell international inc. and its affiliates (the plan) was approved by the
shareowners at the annual meeting of shareowners effective on april 26, 2011.
following approval of the plan on april 26, 2011 we have not and will not grant any new
awards to key employees under any previously existing stock-based compensation
plans. there were 39,582,132 shares available for future grants under the
terms of the plan at december 31, 2011. additionally, under the 2006 stock plan
for non-employee directors of honeywell international inc. (the directors plan)
there were 229,000 shares of honeywell common stock available for future grant
as of december 31, 2011.

84



stock
options—the exercise price, term and other conditions
applicable to each option granted under our stock plans are generally
determined by the management development and compensation committee of the
board. the exercise price of stock options is set on the grant date and may not
be less than the fair market value per share of our stock on that date. the
fair value is recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service
period (generally the vesting period of the award). options generally vest over
a four-year period and expire after ten years.

the
fair value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant using the
black-scholes option-pricing model. expected volatility is based on implied
volatilities from traded options on honeywell common stock. we used a monte
carlo simulation model to derive an expected term. such model uses historical
data to estimate option exercise activity and post-vest termination behavior.
the expected term represents an estimate of the time options are expected to
remain outstanding. the risk-free rate for periods within the contractual life
of the option is based on the u.s. treasury yield curve in effect at the time
of grant.

compensation
cost on a pre-tax basis related to stock options recognized in operating
results (included in selling, general and administrative expenses) in 2011,
2010 and 2009 was $59, $55 and $39 million, respectively. the associated future
income tax benefit recognized in 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $19, $16 and $13
million, respectively. 

the
following table sets forth fair value per share information, including related
weighted-average assumptions, used to determine compensation cost:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
weighted average fair value
per share of options granted during the year(1)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12.56
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8.96
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6.73
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assumptions:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected annual dividend yield
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.68
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4.26
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
expected volatility
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
27.60
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29.39
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35.78
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
risk-free rate of return
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.47
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.64
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.53
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
expected option term (years)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.8
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.8
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
estimated on date of grant using black-scholes option-pricing model.
 
 


the following table summarizes information about stock option activity
for the three years ended december 31, 2011:

85







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
number of
options
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
weighted
average
exercise
price
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
outstanding
at december 31, 2008
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40,933,522
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
43.97 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,159,650
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28.40 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exercised
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(645,201
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
31.66 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lapsed
or canceled
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8,537,598
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
53.90 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
outstanding
at december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40,910,373
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38.58 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,607,950
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.29 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exercised
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(5,211,526
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
34.77 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lapsed
or canceled
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,515,266
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44.14 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
outstanding
at december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40,791,531
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39.05 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,625,950
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
57.08 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exercised
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7,984,840
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36.39 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lapsed
or canceled
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,516,271
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42.38 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
outstanding
at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38,916,370
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
43.01 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
vested
and expected to vest at december 31, 2011(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35,845,642
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
42.49 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exercisable
at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21,672,281
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
40.71 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
represents the sum of vested options of
21.7 million and expected to vest options of 14.1 million. expected to vest
options are derived by applying the pre-vesting forfeiture rate assumption to
total outstanding unvested options 17.2 million.
 
 


the
following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding and
exercisable at december 31, 2011:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
options outstanding
 
 
  
 
 
options exercisable
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
range of exercise prices
 
 
  
 
 
number
outstanding
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
weighted
average
life (1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
weighted
average
exercise
price
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
aggregate
intrinsic
value
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
number
exercisable
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
weighted
average
exercise
price
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
aggregate
intrinsic
value
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
$21.75–$32.99 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,037,712
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
27.53
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
216
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,346,486
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
26.79
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
120 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
$33.00–$39.99 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,219,120
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.75
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36.22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
95
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,219,120
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36.22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
95 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
$40.00–$49.99 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14,259,988
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6.31
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,978,375
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
43.96
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
93 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
$50.00–$74.95 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,399,550
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
57.52
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,128,300
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
58.23
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38,916,370
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6.27
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
43.01
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
478
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21,672,281
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
308 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


(1) average remaining contractual life in years.

there were
24,722,493 and 27,427,023 options exercisable at weighted average exercise
prices of $39.43 and $38.85 at december 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 

the total
intrinsic value of options (which is the amount by which the stock price
exceeded the exercise price of the options on the date of exercise) exercised
during 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $164, $54 and $4 million, respectively. during
2011, 2010 and 2009, the amount of cash received from the exercise of stock
options was $290, $181 and $20 million, respectively, with an associated tax
benefit realized of $54, $18 and $1 million, respectively. in 2011, 2010 and
2009 we classified $42, $13 and $1 million, respectively, of this benefit as a
financing cash inflow in the consolidated statement of cash flows, and the
balance was classified as cash from operations.

at
december 31, 2011 there was $119 million of total unrecognized compensation
cost related to non-vested stock option awards which is expected to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.52 years. the total fair value
of options vested during 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $52, $41 and $51 million,
respectively.

86





restricted
stock units—restricted stock unit (rsu) awards entitle the
holder to receive one share of common stock for each unit when the units vest.
rsus are issued to certain key employees at fair market value at the date of
grant as compensation. rsus typically become fully vested over periods ranging
from three to seven years and are payable in honeywell common stock upon
vesting.

the
following table summarizes information about rsu activity for the three years
ended december 31, 2011:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
number of
restricted
stock
units
 
 
  
 
 
weighted
average
grant
date
fair
value
per
share
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-vested at december 31, 2008
 
 
  
 
 
6,825,717
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
46.63 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
3,691,129
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
30.16 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
vested
 
 
  
 
 
(1,313,975
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.44 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forfeited
 
 
  
 
 
(940,094
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44.51 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-vested at december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
8,262,777
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.49 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
3,842,367
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42.33 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
vested
 
 
  
 
 
(1,593,979
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48.71 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forfeited
 
 
  
 
 
(537,212
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.45 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-vested at december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
9,973,953
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39.89 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
granted
 
 
  
 
 
1,887,733
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
55.11 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
vested
 
 
  
 
 
(1,509,528
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
49.48 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
forfeited
 
 
  
 
 
(605,725
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
40.11 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-vested at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
9,746,433
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
41.35 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

as
of december 31, 2011, there was approximately $179 million of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested rsus granted under our
stock plans which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period
of 1.8 years. compensation expense related to rsus was $109, $109 and $79
million in 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively.

non-employee
directors’ plan—under the directors’ plan each new non-employee
director receives a one-time grant of 3,000 restricted stock units that will
vest on the fifth anniversary of continuous board service.

in
2011, each non-employee director received an annual grant to purchase 5,000
shares of common stock at the fair market value on the date of grant. in 2012,
the annual equity grant will change from a fixed number of shares to a target
value of $75,000 and will consist of 50 percent options and 50 percent rsus.
options will become exercisable over a four-year period and expire after ten
years. rsus will generally vest on the third anniversary of the date of grant.

note 21. commitments
and contingencies

environmental matters

we
are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign government
requirements relating to the protection of the environment. we believe that, as
a general matter, our policies, practices and procedures are properly designed
to prevent unreasonable risk of environmental damage and personal injury and
that our handling, manufacture, use and disposal of hazardous substances are in
accordance with environmental and safety laws and regulations. however, mainly
because of past operations and operations of predecessor companies, we, like
other companies engaged in similar businesses, have incurred remedial response
and voluntary cleanup costs for site contamination and are a party to lawsuits
and claims associated with environmental and safety matters, including past
production of products containing hazardous substances. additional lawsuits,
claims and costs involving environmental matters are likely to continue to
arise in the future.

with
respect to environmental matters involving site contamination, we continually
conduct studies, individually or jointly with other potentially responsible
parties, to determine the feasibility of various remedial 

87



techniques. it is our policy to record
appropriate liabilities for environmental matters when remedial efforts or
damage claim payments are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.
such liabilities are based on our best estimate of the undiscounted future
costs required to complete the remedial work. the recorded liabilities are
adjusted periodically as remediation efforts progress or as additional
technical, regulatory or legal information becomes available. given the
uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations, enforcement policies,
the impact of other potentially responsible parties, technology and information
related to individual sites, we do not believe it is possible to develop an
estimate of the range of reasonably possible environmental loss in excess of
our recorded liabilities. we expect to fund expenditures for these matters from
operating cash flow. the timing of cash expenditures depends on a number of
factors, including the timing of remedial investigations and feasibility
studies, the timing of litigation and settlements of remediation liability,
personal injury and property damage claims, regulatory approval of cleanup
projects, remedial techniques to be utilized and agreements with other parties.


the
following table summarizes information concerning our recorded liabilities for
environmental costs:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
753
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
779
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
946
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accruals for environmental
matters deemed probable and reasonably estimable
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
240
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
225
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
151
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
environmental liability
payments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(270
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(266
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(318
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

 
 
end of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
723
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
753
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
779
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


environmental
liabilities are included in the following balance sheet accounts:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
303
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
328 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
420
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
425 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
723
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
753 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

although
we do not currently possess sufficient information to reasonably estimate the
amounts of liabilities to be recorded upon future completion of studies,
litigation or settlements, and neither the timing nor the amount of the
ultimate costs associated with environmental matters can be determined, they
could be material to our consolidated results of operations or operating cash
flows in the periods recognized or paid. however, considering our past
experience and existing reserves, we do not expect that these environmental
matters will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial
position.

new
jersey chrome sites—the excavation and offsite disposal of approximately
one million tons of chromium residue present at a predecessor honeywell site
located in jersey city, new jersey, known as study area 7, was completed in
january 2010. we are also implementing related groundwater remedial actions,
and are seeking the appropriate permits from state and federal agencies for
related river sediment work approved by the federal court. provisions have been
made in our financial statements for the estimated cost of these remedies.

the
above-referenced site is the most significant of the 21 sites located in hudson
county, new jersey that are the subject of an administrative consent order
(aco) entered into with the new jersey department of environmental protection
(njdep) in 1993 (the “honeywell aco sites”). remedial investigations and
activities consistent with the aco and other applicable settlement orders have
been conducted and are underway at the other honeywell aco sites. in addition,
a settlement order was entered by the new jersey state superior court in the
third quarter of 2011 resolving litigation brought by the njdep against
honeywell and two other companies regarding the investigation and remediation
of the remaining sites in the area that allegedly have chromium contamination
(known as the publicly funded sites). under the settlement, honeywell has
accepted responsibility to remediate 24 of the 53 publicly funded sites and
will also bear 50 percent of the costs at another 10 publicly funded sites.
honeywell is developing a schedule for the investigation and remediation of
these publicly funded sites. we have recorded reserves for the honeywell aco
sites and the applicable publicly funded sites where 

88



appropriate under the accounting policy
described above.

dundalk
marine terminal, baltimore, md—chrome residue from legacy chrome plant operations
in baltimore was deposited as fill at the dundalk marine terminal (“dmt”),
which is owned and operated by the maryland port administration (“mpa”).
honeywell and the mpa have been sharing costs to investigate and mitigate
related environmental issues, and have entered into a cost sharing agreement
under which honeywell will bear 77 percent of the costs of developing and
implementing permanent remedies for the dmt facility. in january 2011, the mpa
and honeywell submitted to the maryland department of the environment (“mde”) a
corrective measures alternatives analysis (“cmaa”) of certain potential
remedies for dmt to assist mde in selection of a final remedy, which has not
yet occurred. provision has been made in our financial statements for the cmaa
consistent with the accounting policy described above. we have negotiated a
consent decree with the mpa and mde with respect to the investigation and
remediation of the dmt facility. the consent decree is being challenged in
federal court by build, a baltimore community group, together with a local
church and two individuals (collectively “build”). in october 2007, the court
dismissed with prejudice build’s state law claims and dismissed without
prejudice build’s rcra claims regarding neighborhoods near the dmt facility. in
august 2008, the court held a hearing on the company’s motion to dismiss
build’s remaining claims on the grounds that mde is diligently prosecuting the
investigation and remediation of the dmt. we are awaiting the court’s decision.
we do not believe that this matter will have a material adverse impact on our
consolidated financial position or operating cash flows. given the scope and
complexity of this project, it is possible that the cost of remediation, when
determinable, could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations
in the periods recognized.

onondaga
lake, syracuse, ny—we are implementing a combined dredging/capping
remedy of onondaga lake pursuant to a consent decree approved by the united
states district court for the northern district of new york in january 2007. we
have accrued for our estimated cost of remediating onondaga lake based on
currently available information and analysis performed by our engineering
consultants. honeywell is also conducting remedial investigations and
activities at other sites in syracuse. we have recorded reserves for these
investigations and activities where appropriate under the accounting policy
described above.

honeywell
has entered into a cooperative agreement with potential natural resource
trustees to assess alleged natural resource damages relating to this site. it
is not possible to predict the outcome or duration of this assessment, or the
amounts of, or responsibility for, any damages.

asbestos matters

like
many other industrial companies, honeywell is a defendant in personal injury
actions related to asbestos. we did not mine or produce asbestos, nor did we
make or sell insulation products or other construction materials that have been
identified as the primary cause of asbestos related disease in the vast
majority of claimants. 

honeywell’s
predecessors owned north american refractories company (narco) from 1979 to
1986. narco produced refractory products (bricks and cement used in high
temperature applications). we sold the narco business in 1986 and agreed to
indemnify narco with respect to personal injury claims for products that had
been discontinued prior to the sale (as defined in the sale agreement). narco
retained all liability for all other claims. narco and/or honeywell are
defendants in asbestos personal injury cases asserting claims based upon
alleged exposure to narco asbestos-containing products. claimants consist
largely of individuals who allege exposure to narco asbestos-containing
refractory products in an occupational setting. these claims, and the filing of
subsequent claims, have been stayed continuously since january 4, 2002, the
date on which narco sought bankruptcy protection (see discussion below). 

honeywell’s
bendix friction materials (bendix) business manufactured automotive brake parts
that contained chrysotile asbestos in an encapsulated form. claimants consist
largely of individuals who allege exposure to asbestos from brakes from either
performing or being in the vicinity of individuals who performed brake
replacements.

the
following tables summarize information concerning narco and bendix asbestos
related balances:

89







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asbestos
related liabilities
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2009
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning
of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
594
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,125
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,719
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
566
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,128
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,694
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
578
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,131
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,709
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrual
for update to estimated liability
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
170
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
162
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
165
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
127
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
132
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change
in estimated cost of future claims
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
update
of expected resolution values for pending claims
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asbestos
related liability payments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(166
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(5
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(171
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(157
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(6
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(163
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(148
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(156
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
end
of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
613
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,123
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,736
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
594
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,125
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,719
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
566
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,128
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,694
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance
recoveries for asbestos related liabilities
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2011
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2010
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december 31,
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
bendix
 
 
  
 
 
narco
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
718
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
875
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
172
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
831
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,003
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
156
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
877
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,033
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
probable insurance recoveries
related to estimated liability
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance receipts for
asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(100
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(134
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(41
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(100
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(141
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(16
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance receivables
settlements and write offs
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(38
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(38
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
end of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
162
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
618
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
780
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
718
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
875
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
172
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
831
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
1,003
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


narco
and bendix asbestos related balances are included in the following balance
sheet accounts:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
other current assets
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
50 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance recoveries for asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
709
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
825 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
780
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
875 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
237
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
162 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,499
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,557 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,736
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,719 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

narco
products – on january 4, 2002, narco filed a petition for reorganization under
chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code. in connection with the filing of
narco’s petition in 2002, the bankruptcy court issued an injunction staying the
prosecution of narco-related asbestos claims against the company, which stay
has 

90



continuously remained in place. in november
2007, the u.s. bankruptcy court for the western district of pennsylvania
confirmed narco’s third amended plan of reorganization (narco plan of
reorganization). all challenges to the narco plan of reorganization were fully
resolved in the third quarter of 2010. the narco plan of reorganization cannot
become effective, however, until unrelated issues pertaining to certain narco
affiliates which are pending in bankruptcy court are resolved. it is not
possible to predict the timing or outcome of the bankruptcy court proceedings
in the affiliates’ case or whether discussions between the parties will resolve
the matter. we expect that the stay enjoining litigation against narco and
honeywell will remain in effect until the effective date of the narco plan of
reorganization.

in
connection with narco’s bankruptcy filing, we agreed to certain obligations
which will be triggered upon the effective date of the narco plan of
reorganization. honeywell will provide narco with $20 million in financing and
simultaneously forgive such indebtedness. we will also pay $40 million to
narco’s former parent company and $16 million to certain asbestos claimants
whose claims were resolved during the pendency of the narco bankruptcy
proceedings. these amounts have been classified as accrued liabilities in the
consolidated balance sheet as of december 31, 2011.

when
the narco plan of reorganization becomes effective, in connection with its
implementation, a federally authorized 524(g) trust (“narco trust”) will be
established for the evaluation and resolution of all existing and future narco
asbestos claims. when the narco trust is established, both honeywell and narco
will be entitled to a permanent channeling injunction barring all present and
future individual actions in state or federal courts and requiring all asbestos
related claims based on exposure to narco products to be made against the
trust. the narco trust will review submitted claims and determine award amounts
in accordance with established trust distribution procedures approved by the
bankruptcy court which set forth all criteria claimants must meet to qualify
for compensation including, among other things, exposure and medical criteria
that determine the award amount.

once
the narco trust is established and operational, honeywell will be obligated to
fund narco asbestos claims submitted to the trust which qualify for payment
under the trust distribution procedures, subject to annual caps up to $150
million in any year, provided, however, that the first $100 million of claims
processed through the narco trust (the “initial claims amount”) will not count
against the first year annual cap and any unused portion of the initial claims
amount will roll over to subsequent years until fully utilized.

once
the narco trust is established and operational, honeywell will also be
responsible for the following funding obligations which are not subject to the
annual cap described above: a) previously approved payments due to claimants
pursuant to settlement agreements reached during the pendency of the narco
bankruptcy proceedings which provide that a portion of these settlements is to
be paid by the narco trust, which amounts are estimated at $130 million and are
expected to be paid during the first year of trust operations and, b) payments
due to claimants pursuant to settlement agreements reached during the pendency
of the narco bankruptcy proceedings that provide for the right to submit claims
to the narco trust subject to qualification under the terms of the settlement
agreements and trust distribution procedures criteria, which amounts are
estimated at $150 million and are expected to be paid during the first two
years of trust operations. 

our
consolidated financial statements reflect an estimated liability for the
amounts discussed above, unsettled claims pending as of the time narco filed for
bankruptcy protection and for the estimated value of future narco asbestos
claims expected to be asserted against the narco trust through 2018. in light
of the uncertainties inherent in making long-term projections and in connection
with the initial operation of a 524(g) trust, as well as the stay of all narco
asbestos claims since january 2002, we do not believe that we have a reasonable
basis for estimating narco asbestos claims beyond 2018. in the absence of
actual trust experience on which to base the estimate, honeywell projected the
probable value, including trust claim handling costs, of asbestos related
future liabilities based on company specific and general asbestos claims filing
rates, expected rates of disease and anticipated claim values. specifically,
the valuation methodology included an analysis of the population likely to have
been exposed to asbestos containing products, epidemiological studies to
estimate the number of people likely to develop asbestos related diseases,
narco asbestos claims filing history, general asbestos claims filing rates in
the tort system and in certain operating asbestos trusts, and the claims
experience in those forums, the pending inventory of narco asbestos claims,
disease criteria and payment values contained in the trust distribution
procedures and an estimated approval rate of claims submitted to the narco
trust. this methodology used to estimate the liability for future claims has
been commonly accepted by numerous bankruptcy courts addressing 524(g) trusts and
resulted in a range of estimated liability for future claims of $743 to $961
million. we believe that no amount within this range is a better estimate than
any other amount and accordingly, we have recorded the minimum amount in the
range.

our
insurance receivable corresponding to the liability for settlement of pending
and future narco asbestos claims reflects coverage which reimburses honeywell
for portions of the costs incurred to settle narco 

91



related claims and court judgments as well as
defense costs and is provided by a large number of insurance policies written
by dozens of insurance companies in both the domestic insurance market and the
london excess market. at december 31, 2011, a significant portion of this
coverage is with insurance companies with whom we have agreements to pay full
policy limits. we conduct analyses to determine the amount of insurance that we
estimate is probable of recovery in relation to payment of current and
estimated future claims. while the substantial majority of our insurance
carriers are solvent, some of our individual carriers are insolvent, which has
been considered in our analysis of probable recoveries. we made judgments
concerning insurance coverage that we believe are reasonable and consistent with
our historical dealings with our insurers, our knowledge of any pertinent
solvency issues surrounding insurers and various judicial determinations
relevant to our insurance programs.

in
2006, travelers casualty and insurance company (“travelers”) filed a
declaratory judgment action in the supreme court of new york, county of new
york against honeywell and other insurance carriers that provide coverage for
narco asbestos claims, seeking a declaration regarding coverage obligations for
narco asbestos claims under high excess insurance coverage issued by travelers
and the other insurance carriers. the other insurance carriers asserted cross
claims against honeywell seeking declarations regarding their coverage
obligations for narco asbestos claims under high excess insurance coverage
issued by them. since then, the company has entered into settlement agreements
resolving all narco-related asbestos coverage issues with certain of these
insurance carriers, including travelers. approximately $57 million of remaining
unsettled coverage is included in our narco-related insurance receivable at
december 31, 2011. honeywell believes it is entitled to the coverage at issue
and expects to prevail in this matter. in 2007, honeywell prevailed on a
critical choice of law issue concerning the appropriate method of allocating
narco-related asbestos liabilities to triggered policies. the plaintiffs
appealed and the trial court’s ruling was upheld by the intermediate appellate
court in 2009. plaintiffs’ further appeal to the new york court of appeals, the
highest court in new york, was denied in october 2009. a related new jersey
action brought by honeywell has been dismissed, but all coverage claims against
plaintiffs have been preserved in the new york action. based upon (i) our
understanding of relevant facts and applicable law, (ii) the terms of insurance
policies at issue, (iii) our experience on matters of this nature, and (iv) the
advice of counsel, we believe that the amount due from the remaining insurance
carriers is probable of recovery. while honeywell expects to prevail in this
matter, an adverse outcome could have a material impact on our results of
operations in the period recognized but would not be material to our
consolidated financial position or operating cash flows.

projecting
future events is subject to many uncertainties that could cause the narco
related asbestos liabilities or assets to be higher or lower than those
projected and recorded. there is no assurance that the plan of reorganization
will become final, that insurance recoveries will be timely or whether there
will be any narco related asbestos claims beyond 2018. given the inherent
uncertainty in predicting future events, we review our estimates periodically,
and update them based on our experience and other relevant factors. similarly,
we will reevaluate our projections concerning our probable insurance recoveries
in light of any changes to the projected liability or other developments that
may impact insurance recoveries.

friction
products—the following tables present
information regarding bendix related asbestos claims activity:

92






 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
year ended december 31, 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
claims
activity 
 
   
 
2011 
 
   
 
2010 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
claims unresolved at the beginning of year 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
22,480 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
19,940 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
claims filed(a) 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
3,592 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
4,302 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
claims resolved(b) 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
(3,501 
 
) 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
(1,762 
 
) 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
claims unresolved at the end of year 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
22,571 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
22,480 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 


(a) the number of claims filed in 2010 includes approximately 1,541
non-malignant claims (with an accrued liability of approximately $575 thousand
in the aggregate), a majority of which had previously been dismissed in
mississippi and re-filed in arkansas.

(b) the number of claims resolved in 2011 includes approximately 351
claims previously classified as inactive (82% non-malignant and accrued
liability of approximately $1.7 million) which were activated during 2011. the
number of claims resolved in 2010 includes approximately 1,300 claims
previously classified as inactive (95% non-malignant and accrued liability of
approximately $2.0 million) which were activated during 2010.


 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
december 31, 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
disease
distribution of unresolved claims 
 
   
 
2011 
 
   
 
2010 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
mesothelioma and other cancer claims 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
4,943 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
4,856 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
nonmalignant claims 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
17,628 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
17,624 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
total claims 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
22,571 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
22,480 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 


honeywell has experienced average resolution
values per claim excluding legal costs as follows:




 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year ended december
31, 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2008
 
 
  
 
 
2007 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(in whole dollars)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
malignant claims
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
48,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
54,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
50,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
65,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
33,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
nonmalignant claims
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,300
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
200
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,500
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
500
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

it
is not possible to predict whether resolution values for bendix related
asbestos claims will increase, decrease or stabilize in the future.

our
consolidated financial statements reflect an estimated liability for resolution
of pending (claims actually filed as of the financial statement date) and
future bendix related asbestos claims. we have valued bendix pending and future
claims using average resolution values for the previous five years. we update
the resolution values used to estimate the cost of bendix pending and future
claims during the fourth quarter each year.

the
liability for future claims represents the estimated value of future asbestos
related bodily injury claims expected to be asserted against bendix over the
next five years. such estimated cost of future bendix related asbestos claims
is based on historic claims filing experience and dismissal rates, disease
classifications, and resolution values in the tort system for the previous five
years. in light of the uncertainties inherent in making long-term projections,
as well as certain factors unique to friction product asbestos claims, we do
not believe that we have a reasonable basis for estimating asbestos claims
beyond the next five years. the methodology used to estimate the liability for
future claims is similar to that used to estimate the future narco related
asbestos claims liability.

our
insurance receivable corresponding to the liability for settlement of pending
and future bendix asbestos claims reflects coverage which is provided by a
large number of insurance policies written by dozens of insurance companies in
both the domestic insurance market and the london excess market. based on our 

93



ongoing analysis of the probable insurance
recovery, insurance receivables are recorded in the financial statements
simultaneous with the recording of the estimated liability for the underlying
asbestos claims. this determination is based on our analysis of the underlying
insurance policies, our historical experience with our insurers, our ongoing
review of the solvency of our insurers, our interpretation of judicial
determinations relevant to our insurance programs, and our consideration of the
impacts of any settlements reached with our insurers. insurance receivables are
also recorded when structured insurance settlements provide for future fixed
payment streams that are not contingent upon future claims or other events.
such amounts are recorded at the net present value of the fixed payment stream.

on
a cumulative historical basis, honeywell has recorded insurance receivables
equal to approximately 40 percent of the value of the underlying asbestos
claims recorded. however, because there are gaps in our coverage due to
insurance company insolvencies, certain uninsured periods, and insurance
settlements, this rate is expected to decline for any future bendix related
asbestos liabilities that may be recorded. future recoverability rates may also
be impacted by numerous other factors, such as future insurance settlements,
insolvencies and judicial determinations relevant to our coverage program, which
are difficult to predict. assuming continued defense and indemnity spending at
current levels, we estimate that the cumulative recoverability rate could
decline over the next five years to approximately 33 percent.

honeywell
believes it has sufficient insurance coverage and reserves to cover all pending
bendix related asbestos claims and bendix related asbestos claims estimated to
be filed within the next five years. although it is impossible to predict the
outcome of either pending or future bendix related asbestos claims, we do not
believe that such claims would have a material adverse effect on our
consolidated financial position in light of our insurance coverage and our
prior experience in resolving such claims. if the rate and types of claims
filed, the average resolution value of such claims and the period of time over
which claim settlements are paid (collectively, the “variable claims factors”)
do not substantially change, honeywell would not expect future bendix related
asbestos claims to have a material adverse effect on our results of operations
or operating cash flows in any fiscal year. no assurances can be given,
however, that the variable claims factors will not change.

other matters

we
are subject to a number of other lawsuits, investigations and disputes (some of
which involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of the conduct of our
business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government
contracts, product liability, prior acquisitions and divestitures, employee
benefit plans, intellectual property, and environmental, health and safety
matters. we recognize a liability for any contingency that is probable of
occurrence and reasonably estimable. we continually assess the likelihood of
adverse judgments of outcomes in these matters, as well as potential ranges of
possible losses (taking into consideration any insurance recoveries), based on
a careful analysis of each matter with the assistance of outside legal counsel
and, if applicable, other experts. included in these other matters are the
following:

allen,
et al. v. honeywell retirement earnings plan—pursuant to a settlement approved by the u.s. district court for the
district of arizona in february 2008, 18 of 21 claims alleged by plaintiffs in
this class action lawsuit were dismissed with prejudice in exchange for
approximately $35 million (paid from the company’s pension plan) and the
maximum aggregate liability for the remaining three claims (alleging that
honeywell impermissibly reduced the pension benefits of certain employees of a
predecessor entity when the plan was amended in 1983 and failed to calculate
benefits in accordance with the terms of the plan) was capped at $500 million.
in october 2009, the court granted summary judgment in favor of the honeywell
retirement earnings plan with respect to the claim regarding the calculation of
benefits. in may 2011, the parties engaged in mediation and reached an
agreement in principle to settle the three remaining claims for $23.8 million
(also to be paid from the company’s pension plan). settlement documents have
been submitted to the court for classwide approval. a preliminary settlement
order has been approved by the court and a fairness hearing on the settlement
is scheduled for april 2012. upon court approval of the settlement, all claims
in this matter will be fully resolved.

quick
lube—on march 31, 2008, s&e
quick lube, a filter distributor, filed suit in u.s. district court for the
district of connecticut alleging that twelve filter manufacturers, including
honeywell, engaged in a conspiracy to fix prices, rig bids and allocate u.s.
customers for aftermarket automotive filters. this suit is a purported class
action on behalf of direct purchasers of filters from the defendants. parallel
purported class actions, including on behalf of indirect purchasers of filters,
have been filed by other plaintiffs in a variety of jurisdictions in the united
states and canada. the u.s cases have been consolidated into a single
multi-district litigation in the northern district of illinois. in june 2011,
plaintiff’s principal witness pled guilty to a felony count of having made
false statements to federal investigators. in february 2012, honeywell reached
an agreement in principle to resolve the multi-district litigation class action
as to all plaintiffs, subject to finalization of the agreement and approval by
the court. as previously reported, the antitrust division of the department of
justice notified honeywell in january

94



2010 that it had officially closed its
investigation into possible collusion in the replacement auto filters industry.

honeywell
v. united auto workers (“uaw”) et. al—in july 2011, honeywell filed an
action in federal court (district of new jersey) against the uaw and all former
employees who retired under a series of master collective bargaining agreements
(“mcbas”) between honeywell and the uaw. the company is seeking a declaratory
judgment that certain express limitations on its obligation to contribute toward
the healthcare coverage of such retirees (the “caps”) set forth in the mcbas
may be implemented, effective january 1, 2012. in september 2011, the uaw and
certain retiree defendants filed a motion to dismiss the new jersey action and
filed suit in the eastern district of michigan alleging that the mcbas do not
provide for caps on the company’s liability for healthcare coverage. the uaw
and retiree plaintiffs subsequently filed a motion for class certification and
a motion for partial summary judgment in the michigan action, seeking a ruling
that retirees who retired prior to the initial inclusion of the caps in the
2003 mcba are not covered by the caps as a matter of law. in december 2011, the
new jersey action was dismissed on jurisdictional grounds. honeywell has filed
a motion for expedited review of the new jersey court’s dismissal with the
united states court of appeals for the third circuit and the parties are
awaiting the court’s instructions with respect to how the michigan action is to
proceed. honeywell is confident that the caps will be upheld and that its
liability for healthcare coverage premiums with respect to the putative class
will be limited as negotiated and expressly set forth in the applicable mcbas.
in the event of an adverse ruling, however, honeywell’s other postretirement
benefits for pre-2003 retirees would increase by approximately $150 million,
reflecting the estimated value of these caps. 

given
the uncertainty inherent in litigation and investigations (including the
specific matters referenced above), we do not believe it is possible to develop
estimates of reasonably possible loss in excess of current accruals for these
matters. considering our past experience and existing accruals, we do not
expect the outcome of these matters, either individually or in the aggregate,
to have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position.
because most contingencies are resolved over long periods of time, potential
liabilities are subject to change due to new developments, changes in
settlement strategy or the impact of evidentiary requirements, which could
cause us to pay damage awards or settlements (or become subject to equitable
remedies) that could have a material adverse effect on our results of
operations or operating cash flows in the periods recognized or paid.

warranties
and guarantees—we have issued or are
a party to the following direct and indirect guarantees at december 31, 2011:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
maximum
potential
future
payments
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
operating lease residual values
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
43
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other third parties’ financing
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
unconsolidated affiliates’ financing
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
customer financing
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
73
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

we
do not expect that these guarantees will have a material adverse effect on our
consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity.

in
connection with the disposition of certain businesses and facilities we have
indemnified the purchasers for the expected cost of remediation of
environmental contamination, if any, existing on the date of disposition. such
expected costs are accrued when environmental assessments are made or remedial
efforts are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.

in
the normal course of business we issue product warranties and product
performance guarantees. we accrue for the estimated cost of product warranties
and performance guarantees based on contract terms and historical experience at
the time of sale. adjustments to initial obligations for warranties and guarantees
are made as changes in the obligations become reasonably estimable. the
following table summarizes information concerning our recorded obligations for
product warranties and product performance guarantees:

95







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december
31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
415
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
407
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
417
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accruals for warranties/guarantees issued during the year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
214
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
188
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
adjustment of pre-existing warranties/guarantees
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlement of warranty/guarantee claims
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(208
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(193
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(191
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
end of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
402
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
415
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
407
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 




product warranties and product performance guarantees are included in
the following balance sheet accounts:




 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
364
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
380
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
35
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
402
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
  
 
 
415
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

96



note 22. pension and
other postretirement benefits

we
sponsor both funded and unfunded u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension
plans covering the majority of our employees and retirees. pension benefits for
substantially all u.s. employees are provided through non-contributory,
qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans. u.s. defined benefit
pension plans comprise 77 percent of our projected benefit obligation. non-u.s.
employees, who are not u.s. citizens, are covered by various retirement benefit
arrangements, some of which are considered to be defined benefit pension plans
for accounting purposes. non-u.s. defined benefit pension plans comprise 23
percent of our projected benefit obligation.

we
also sponsor postretirement benefit plans that provide health care benefits and
life insurance coverage to eligible retirees. our retiree medical plans mainly
cover u.s. employees who retire with pension eligibility for hospital,
professional and other medical services. most of the u.s. retiree medical plans
require deductibles and copayments, and virtually all are integrated with
medicare. retiree contributions are generally required based on coverage type,
plan and medicare eligibility. all non-union hourly and salaried employees
joining honeywell after january 1, 2000 are not eligible to participate in our
retiree medical and life insurance plans. only approximately 5 percent of
honeywell’s u.s. employees are eligible for a retiree medical subsidy from the
company; and this subsidy is limited to a fixed-dollar amount. in addition more
than half of its current retirees either have no company subsidy or have a
fixed dollar subsidy amount. this significantly limits our exposure to the
impact of future health care cost increases. the retiree medical and life
insurance plans are not funded. claims and expenses are paid from our operating
cash flow.

in
2011, in connection with new collective bargaining agreements reached with
several of its union groups, honeywell amended its u.s. retiree medical plans
eliminating the subsidy for those union employees resulting in curtailment
gains totaling $167 million. the curtailment gains represent the recognition in
net periodic postretirement benefit cost of prior service credits attributable
to the future years of service of the union groups for which future accrual of
benefits has been eliminated.

in
2010, honeywell amended its u.s. retiree medical plan to no longer offer
certain post-age-65 retirees honeywell group coverage and facilitate their
purchase of an individual plan in the medicare marketplace. this plan amendment
reduced the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $137 million which
will be recognized as part of net periodic postretirement benefit cost over the
average future service period to full eligibility of the remaining active union
employees still eligible for a retiree medical subsidy. also in 2010, in
connection with a new collective bargaining agreement reached with one of its
union groups, honeywell amended its u.s. retiree medical plan eliminating the
subsidy for those union employees who retire after february 1, 2013. this plan
amendment reduced the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $39
million which will be recognized as part of net periodic postretirement benefit
cost over the average future service period to full eligibility of the
remaining active union employees still eligible for a retiree medical subsidy.
this plan amendment also resulted in a curtailment gain of $37 million in 2010
which represented the recognition in net periodic postretirement benefit cost
of prior service credits attributable to the future years of service of the
union group for which future accrual of benefits was eliminated.

in
2009, honeywell amended the u.s. retiree medical plan eliminating the subsidy
for active non-union employees who retire after september 1, 2009. employees
already retired or who retired on or before september 1, 2009 were not affected
by this change. this plan amendment reduced the accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation by $180 million representing the elimination of benefits
attributable to years of service already rendered by active non-union employees
who are not eligible to retire and those eligible non-union employees who were
assumed not to retire prior to september 1, 2009. this reduction in the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation will be recognized as part of net
periodic postretirement benefit cost over the average future service period to
full eligibility of the remaining active union employees still eligible for a
retiree medical subsidy. this plan amendment also resulted in a curtailment
gain of $98 million in 2009 which represented the recognition in net periodic
post retirement benefit cost of prior service credits attributable to the
future years of service of the employee group for which future accrual of
benefits was eliminated. 

97





the
following tables summarize the balance sheet impact, including the benefit
obligations, assets and funded status associated with our significant pension
and other postretirement benefit plans at december 31, 2011 and 2010.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
pension benefits
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in benefit obligation:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefit obligation at
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14,990
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
13,620
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,373
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,266 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
232
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
221
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
51 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
761
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
768
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
239
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
228 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
plan amendments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
117
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial losses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
566
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,211
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
171
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
150 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
divestitures
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefits paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(952
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(947
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(189
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(181
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(25
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
20
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(141
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefit obligation at end of
year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14,990
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,648
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,373 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair value of plan assets at
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,181
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,306
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,939
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,488 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(41
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,788
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
87
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
414 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
company contributions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,681
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,034
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
124
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
313 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
divestitures
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(33
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefits paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(952
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(947
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(189
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(181
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(25
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
22
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(95
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair value of plan assets at
end of year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,836
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,181
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,939 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
funded status of plans
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2,764
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2,809
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(690
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(434
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts recognized in
consolidated balance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
sheet consist of:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prepaid pension benefit cost(1)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
84
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
135 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued pension liability(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,764
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2,809
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(774
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(569
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net amount recognized
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2,764
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2,809
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(690
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(434
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
included in other assets on consolidated balance sheet
 
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
included in other liabilities - non-current on consolidated balance
sheet
 
 

98







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
other
postretirement benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in benefit obligation:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefit obligation at
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,628
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,748
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
69
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
81
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
plan amendments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(22
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(176
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial losses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
160
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefits paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(138
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(187
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(10
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefit obligation at end of
year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,534
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,628
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
change in plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair value of plan assets at
beginning of year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
company contributions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
benefits paid
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair value of plan assets at
end of year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
funded status of plans
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,534
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,628
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts recognized in consolidated balance sheet consist of:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accrued liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(167
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(197
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
postretirement benefit
obligations other than pensions(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,367
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,431
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net amount recognized
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,534
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(1,628
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
excludes non-u.s. plans of $50 and $46 million in 2011 and 2010,
respectively.
 
 

amounts
recognized in accumulated other comprehensive (income) loss associated with our
significant pension and other postretirement benefit plans at december 31, 2011
and 2010 are as follows.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
pension benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transition obligation
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service cost (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
148
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
177
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(17
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(19
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net actuarial loss
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,559
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,499
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
430
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
321
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net amount recognized
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,707
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,676
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
420
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
311
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
other
postretirement benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(67
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(264
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net actuarial loss
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
391
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
425 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net amount recognized
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
324
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
161 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

the
components of net periodic benefit cost and other amounts recognized in other
comprehensive (income) loss for our significant plans for the years ended
december 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009 include the following components:

99






 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
pension benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net periodic benefit cost
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service cost
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
232
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
221
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
183
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
41
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
761
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
768
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
785
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
239
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
228
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
208
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected return on plan
assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,014
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(902
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(767
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(284
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(248
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(221
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amortization of transition
obligation
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amortization of prior
service cost (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
33
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
recognition of actuarial
losses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,568
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
182
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
447
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
234
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
289
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
308
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net periodic benefit cost
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,604
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
301
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
674
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
249
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
324
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
336
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
changes in plan assets and benefits obligations recognized in other
comprehensive (income) loss
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial (gains)/losses
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,628
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
325
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
686
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
368
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(20
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
449
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service cost (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
117
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transition obligation
recognized during year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service (cost) credit
recognized during year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(33
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(32
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(26
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial losses recognized
during year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,568
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(182
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(447
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(234
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(289
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(308
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
foreign exchange translation
adjustments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(11
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(17
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total recognized in other
comprehensive (income) loss
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
228
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
213
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
123
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(326
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
185
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  


 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total recognized in net
periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive (income) loss
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,636
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
887
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
372
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(2
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
521
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


the
estimated prior service cost for pension benefits that will be amortized from accumulated
other comprehensive (income) loss into net periodic benefit cost in 2012 are
expected to be $28 million and $(2) million for u.s. and non-u.s. benefit
plans, respectively.

100







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
other postretirement benefits
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net
periodic benefit cost
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
cost
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest
cost
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
69
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
81
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
104
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amortization
of prior service (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(44
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(44
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
recognition
of actuarial losses
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
34
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements
and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(167
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(47
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(98
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
net
periodic benefit (income) cost
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(93
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(19
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
changes in plan assets and benefits obligations
recognized in other comprehensive (income) loss
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial losses
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
160
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
46
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service (credit)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(21
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(176
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(180
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
prior service credit
recognized during year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
34
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial losses recognized
during year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(38
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(34
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
settlements and curtailments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
47
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
98
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total recognized in other
comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
148
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
41
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(5
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
total recognized in net
periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
55
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
67
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(24
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

the
estimated net loss and prior service (credit) for other postretirement benefits
that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive (income) loss into
net periodic benefit cost in 2012 are expected to be $40 and $(15) million,
respectively.

major
actuarial assumptions used in determining the benefit obligations and net
periodic benefit cost for our significant benefit plans are presented in the
following table.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
pension benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial assumptions used
to determine benefit obligations as of december 31:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
4.89
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.75
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.84
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.40
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.71
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected annual rate of
compensation increase
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.67
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.79
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.87
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial assumptions used
to determine net periodic benefit cost for years ended december 31:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
5.25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.75
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6.95
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.40
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.71
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6.21
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected rate of return on
plan assets
 
 
  
 
 
8.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
9.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7.06
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7.51
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
7.52
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expected annual rate of
compensation increase
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.79
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.87
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
3.33
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

101







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
other
postretirement benefits
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial assumptions used to
determine benefit obligations as of december 31:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
4.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
4.70
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actuarial assumptions used to
determine net periodic benefit cost for years ended december 31:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
discount rate
 
 
  
 
 
4.70
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.25
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
6.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 

the discount
rate for our u.s. pension and other postretirement benefits plans reflects the
current rate at which the associated liabilities could be settled at the
measurement date of december 31. to determine discount rates for our u.s.
pension and other postretirement benefit plans, we use a modeling process that
involves matching the expected cash outflows of our benefit plans to a yield
curve constructed from a portfolio of high quality, fixed-income debt
instruments. we use the average yield of this hypothetical portfolio as a
discount rate benchmark. the discount rate used to determine the other
postretirement benefit obligation is lower principally due to a shorter
expected duration of other postretirement plan obligations as compared to
pension plan obligations.

our expected
rate of return on u.s. plan assets of 8 percent is a long-term rate based on
historical plan asset returns over varying long-term periods combined with our
expectations on future market conditions and the asset mix of the plan’s
investments. we review the expected rate of return on an annual basis and
revise it as appropriate.

for non-u.s.
benefit plans, none of which was individually material, assumptions reflect
economic assumptions applicable to each country.

pension benefits

included in
the aggregate data in the tables above are the amounts applicable to our
pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations exceeding the fair value of
plan assets. amounts related to such plans were as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
projected
benefit obligation
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
15,600
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14,990
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,141
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,990
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accumulated
benefit obligation
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14,845
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
14,260
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,912
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,883
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fair
value of plan assets
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,836
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,181
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,367
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,474
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

accumulated
benefit obligation for our u.s. defined benefit pension plans were $14.8 and
$14.3 billion and our non-u.s. defined benefit plans were $4.4 and $4.1 billion
at december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.

our asset
investment strategy for our u.s. pension plans focuses on maintaining a
diversified portfolio using various asset classes in order to achieve our
long-term investment objectives on a risk adjusted basis. our actual invested
positions in various securities change over time based on short and longer-term
investment opportunities. to achieve our objectives, we have established
long-term target allocations as follows: 60-70 percent equity securities, 10-20
percent fixed income securities and cash, 5-15 percent real estate investments,
and 10-20 percent other types of investments. equity securities include
publicly-traded stock of companies located both inside and outside the united
states. fixed income securities include corporate bonds of companies from
diversified industries, mortgage-backed securities, and u.s. treasuries. real
estate investments include direct investments in commercial properties and
investments in real estate funds. other types of investments include
investments in private equity and hedge funds that follow several different
strategies. we review our assets on a regular basis to ensure that we are
within the targeted asset allocation ranges and, if necessary, asset balances
are adjusted back within target allocations. 

our non-u.s.
pension assets are typically managed by decentralized fiduciary committees with
the honeywell corporate investments group providing standard funding and
investment guidance. local regulations, local funding rules, and local
financial and tax considerations are part of the funding and investment
allocation process in each country. while our non-u.s. investment policies are
different for each country, the long-term investment objectives are generally
the same as those for the u.s. pension assets. 

102





the fair
values of both our u.s. and non-u.s. pension plans assets at december 31, 2011
and 2010 by asset category are as follows: 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
level 1
 
 
  
 
 
level 2
 
 
  
 
 
level 3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common
stock/preferred stock:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
honeywell common stock
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,012
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,012
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. large cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,697
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,416
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
281
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. mid cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,087
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,087
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. small cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
272
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
272
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
international stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,993
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
17
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate investment trusts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fixed income
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short term investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
941
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
941
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
government securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
291
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
291
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate bonds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,984
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,984
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mortgage/asset-backed securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
435
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
435
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments in
private funds:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
private funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,039
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,039
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
hedge funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
256
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
256
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
direct
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
direct private investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
161
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
161
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate properties
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
553
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
553
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,836
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7,753
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,069
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
level 1
 
 
  
 
 
level 2
 
 
  
 
 
level 3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common
stock/preferred stock:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
honeywell common stock
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
986
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
986
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. large cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,349
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,349
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. mid cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,049
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,049
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. small cap stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
301
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
301
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
international stocks
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,176
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
21
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate investment trusts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fixed income
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short term investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,242
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,242
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
government securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
240
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
240
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate bonds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,342
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,342
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mortgage/asset-backed securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
422
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
422
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments in
private funds:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
private funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,053
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,053
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
hedge funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
214
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
214
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
direct
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
direct private investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate properties
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,181
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,141
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,035
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,005
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 

103







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
level 1
 
 
  
 
 
level 2
 
 
  
 
 
level 3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common
stock/preferred stock:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. companies
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
371
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
249
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
122
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-u.s. companies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,343
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
233
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,110
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fixed income
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short-term investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
government securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,175
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,175
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate bonds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
463
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
463
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mortgage/asset-backed securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments in
private funds:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
private funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
hedge funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
54
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
54
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
160
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
160
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,958
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
560
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,072
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
326
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
level 1
 
 
  
 
 
level 2
 
 
  
 
 
level 3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common
stock/preferred stock:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
u.s. companies
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
338
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
327
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-u.s. companies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,556
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
336
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,220
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
fixed income
investments:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
short-term investments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
176
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
176
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
government securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
915
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
915
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate bonds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
431
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
431
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mortgage/asset-backed securities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
insurance contracts
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
196
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
196
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
investments in
private funds:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
private funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
89
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
89
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
hedge funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
55
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
55
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
real estate funds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
169
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
169
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,939
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
839
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,787
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
313
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


the
following tables summarize changes in the fair value of level 3 assets for the
years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010: 

104







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
private
funds
 
 
  
 
 
direct
private
investments
 
 
  
 
 
hedge
funds
 
 
  
 
 
real estate
funds
 
 
  
 
 
real estate
properties
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
911
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
149
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
132
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
452
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets still held at year-end
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets sold during the year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
29
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
27
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,053
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
214
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets still held at year-end
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
26
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
41
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets sold during the year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(5
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(18
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(14
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,039
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
161
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
256
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
553
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
private
funds
 
 
  
 
 
hedge
funds
 
 
  
 
 
real estate
funds
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
81
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
51
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
137
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets still held at year-end
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets sold during the year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
89
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
55
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
169
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
actual return on plan assets:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets still held at year-end
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
relating to assets sold during the year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(18
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance at december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
54
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
160
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
 


our u.s.
pension assets at december 31, 2011 and 2010 include $976 and $834 million,
respectively, in notional derivative exposure primarily related to outstanding
equity futures contracts. the company enters into futures contracts to gain
exposure to certain markets. 

common
stocks, preferred stocks, real estate investment trusts, and short-term
investments are valued at the closing price reported in the active market in
which the individual securities are traded. corporate bonds, mortgages,
asset-backed securities, and government securities are valued either by using
pricing models, bids provided by brokers or dealers, quoted prices of securities
with similar characteristics or discounted cash flows and as such include
adjustments for certain risks that may not be observable such as credit and
liquidity risks. certain securities are held in commingled funds which are
valued using net asset values provided by the 

105





administrators of the funds. investments in
private equity, debt, real estate and hedge funds and direct private
investments are valued at estimated fair value based on quarterly financial
information received from the investment advisor and/or general partner.
investments in real estate properties are valued on a quarterly basis using the
income approach. valuation estimates are periodically supplemented by third
party appraisals. 

our
general funding policy for qualified pension plans is to contribute amounts at
least sufficient to satisfy regulatory funding standards. in 2011, 2010 and
2009, we were not required to make contributions to our u.s. pension plans,
however, we made voluntary contributions of $1,650, $1,000 and $740 million,
respectively, primarily to improve the funded status of our plans. these
contributions do not reflect benefits paid directly from company assets. in
2012, we expect to make cash contributions of $800 million to $1 billion ($250
million was made in january 2012) to our global defined benefit pension plans
principally to improve the funded status of our plans and also to satisfy
regulatory funding standards in our non-u.s. plans.

benefit
payments, including amounts to be paid from company assets, and reflecting
expected future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
non-u.s. plans
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2012
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,025
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
185
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2013
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,025
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
189
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,051
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
193
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2015
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,101
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
197
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,084
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
203
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2017-2021
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,473
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,097
 
 
  
 
 




other postretirement benefits

the
medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003 (the act)
provides subsidies for employers that sponsor postretirement health care plans
that provide prescription drug coverage that is at least actuarially equivalent
to that offered by medicare part d. the march 2010 enactment of the patient
protection and affordable care act, including modifications made in the health
care and education reconciliation act of 2010 resulted in a one-time, non-cash
charge of $13 million related to income taxes in the first quarter of 2010. the
charge results from a change in the tax treatment of the medicare part d
program. 




 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
assumed health care cost trend
rate:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
health care cost trend rate
assumed for next year
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7.50
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
8.00
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
rate that the cost trend rate
gradually declines to
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5.00
 
 
%
 
 
  
 
 
5.00
 
 
%
 
 
 
 
year that the rate reaches the
rate it is assumed to remain at
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2017
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2017
 
 
  
 
 

the
assumed health care cost trend rate has a significant effect on the amounts
reported. a one-percentage-point change in the assumed health care cost trend
rate would have the following effects:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1 percentage point
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
increase
 
 
  
 
 
decrease
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
effect on total of service and interest cost components
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(3
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
126
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(80
 
 
)
 
 

benefit payments reflecting
expected future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid as follows:

106







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
without impact of
medicare subsidy
 
 
  
 
 
net of
medicare subsidy
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2012
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
180
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
167
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2013
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
168
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
156
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2014
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
157
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
145
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2015
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
147
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
136
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
137
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
126
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2017-2021
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
551
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
499
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 


employee savings plans

we
sponsor employee savings plans under which we match, in the form of our common
stock, savings plan contributions for certain eligible employees. shares issued
under the stock match plans were 2.6, 2.4, and 4.8 million at a cost of $138,
$105 and $158 million in 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively.

note 23. segment
financial data

we
globally manage our business operations through four reportable operating
segments serving customers worldwide with aerospace products and services,
control, sensing and security technologies for buildings, homes and industry,
automotive products and chemicals. segment information is consistent with how
management reviews the businesses, makes investing and resource allocation
decisions and assesses operating performance. our four reportable segments are
as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
aerospace includes air transport and regional, business and general
aviation and defense and space and provides products and services which
include auxiliary power units; propulsion engines; environmental control
systems; electric power systems, engine controls; repair and overhaul
services; flight safety, communications, navigation, radar and surveillance
systems; aircraft lighting; management and technical services; logistic
services; advanced systems and instruments; and aircraft wheels and brakes.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
automation and control solutions includes energy, safety &
security (controls for heating, cooling, indoor air quality, ventilation,
humidification, lighting and home automation; advanced software applications
for home/building control and optimization; sensors, switches, control
systems and instruments for measuring pressure, air flow, temperature and
electrical current; security, fire and gas detection; personal protection
equipment; access control; video surveillance equipment; remote patient
monitoring systems; and automatic identification and data collection);
process solutions (provides a full range of automation and control solutions
for industrial plants, offering advanced software and automation systems that
integrate, control and monitor complex processes in many types of industrial
settings as well as equipment that controls, measures and analyzes natural
gas production and transportation); and building solutions & distribution
(installs, distributes, maintains and upgrades systems that keep buildings
safe, comfortable and productive).
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
performance materials and technologies includes advanced materials
(fluorocarbons, hydrofluoroolefins, caprolactam, resins, ammonium sulfate for
fertilizer, specialty films, waxes, additives, advanced fibers, customized
research chemicals and intermediates, and electronic materials and chemicals)
and uop (catalysts and adsorbents).
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•
 
 
transportation systems includes turbochargers, thermal systems, brake
hard parts and other friction materials.
 
 

the
accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in note 1.
honeywell’s senior management evaluates segment performance based on segment
profit. segment profit is measured as business unit income (loss) before taxes
excluding general corporate unallocated expense, other income (expense),
interest and other financial charges, pension and other postretirement benefits
(expense), stock compensation expense, repositioning and other charges and
accounting changes.

107







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
6,494
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,868
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,930
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,981
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,815
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,833
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,475
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,683
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,763
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,328
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
11,733
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10,699
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,207
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,016
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,912
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,535
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
13,749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
12,611
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,064
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,449
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,895
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
595
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
277
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
249
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,659
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,726
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,144
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,859
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,192
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,432
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
product
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
service
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
depreciation and amortization
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
208
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
224
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
217
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
364
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
368
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
352
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
216
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
222
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
96
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
97
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
98
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
64
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
948
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
970
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
936
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,023
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,835
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,893
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,083
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,770
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,588
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,042
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
605
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
353
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
61
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(276
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(222
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(156
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,357
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,991
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
capital expenditures
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
174
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
158
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
184
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
153
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
131
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
114
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
188
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
153
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
133
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
66
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
89
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
88
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
790
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
644
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
605
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
december 31,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
total assets
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
aerospace
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9,109
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,604
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,386
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
automation and control
solutions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19,127
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18,183
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15,474
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
performance materials and
technologies
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,402
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,938
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,657
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
transportation systems
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,991
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,806
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,680
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
corporate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,179
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,303
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,796
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
39,808
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
37,834
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
35,993
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

108





a reconciliation of segment profit to
consolidated income from continuing operations before taxes are as follows:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended
december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
segment profit
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
5,357
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
4,485
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
3,991
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other income/ (expense)(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
33
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
69
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
28
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest and other financial charges
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(376
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(386
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(458
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
stock compensation expense(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(168
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(163
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(117
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pension expense-ongoing(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(105
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(185
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(287
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
pension mark-to-market adjustment(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1,802
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(471
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(741
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
other postretirement income/(expense)(2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
86
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(29
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
repositioning and other charges (2)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(743
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(598
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(467
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations before taxes
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,282
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
2,722
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
1,964
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(1) equity income/(loss) of affiliated companies is included in
segment profit.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(2) amounts included in cost of products and services sold and
selling, general and administrative expenses.
 
 


note
24. geographic areas - financial data


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
net sales(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
long-lived assets(2)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
united
states
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
21,005
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
18,858
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
18,000
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,426
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
12,267
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
11,645 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
europe
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
9,604
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8,367
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,594
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,991
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,973
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3,798 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
other
international
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,920
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
5,125
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
4,357
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,728
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,296
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,072 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
29,951
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
19,145
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
18,536
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
17,515 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 


(1) sales between geographic areas approximate market and are not
significant. net sales are classified according to their country of origin.
included in united states net sales are export sales of $4,549, $3,629 and
$3,548 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.

(2) long-lived assets are comprised of property, plant and equipment,
goodwill and other intangible assets.

note
25. supplemental cash flow information

109







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
years ended december 31,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2009
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
payments
for repositioning and other charges:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
severance and exit cost
payments
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(161
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(151
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(200
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
environmental payments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(270
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(266
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(318
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
insurance receipts for
asbestos related liabilities
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
134
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
141
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
asbestos related liability
payments
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(171
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(163
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(156
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(468
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(439
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
(658
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  



 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interest
paid, net of amounts capitalized
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
378
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
410
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
469
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income
taxes paid, net of refunds
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
578
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
80
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
361
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
non-cash
investing and financing activities:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common stock contributed to
savings plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
138
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
105
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
153
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
common stock contributed to
u.s. pension plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
400
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
740
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
marketable securities
contributed to non-u.s. pension plans
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
242
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 


note 26. unaudited quarterly financial
information

110






 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2011
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
mar. 31
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
june 30
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
sept. 30
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
dec. 31
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,672
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9,086
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9,298
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
9,473
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
36,529 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gross profit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,248
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,422
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,265
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,038
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,973 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income (loss) from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
687
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
796
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
685
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(310
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,858 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations(1)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
177
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
209 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income (loss) attributable
to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
705
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
810
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
862
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(310
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,067 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share - basic
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income (loss) from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.87
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.01
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.88
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.40
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.38 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.03
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.23
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.27 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  



 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income (loss) attributable
to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.90
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.03
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.11
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.40
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.65 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share - assuming
dilution
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income (loss) from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.86
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.00
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.87
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.40
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.35 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.23
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
—
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.26 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income (loss) attributable
to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.88
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.10
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(0.40
 
 
)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.61 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dividends paid per share
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3325
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3325
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3325
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3725
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.37 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
market price per share
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
high
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
59.71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
62.00
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
60.44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
54.98
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
62.00 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
low
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
53.48
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
55.53
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
41.94
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42.32
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
41.94 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2010
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
mar. 31
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
june 30
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
sept. 30
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
dec. 31
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
year
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net sales
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7,536
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
7,926
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,139
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
8,749
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
32,350 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gross profit
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,869
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,959
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,969
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,832
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
7,629 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amounts attributable to honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations less net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
471
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
550
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
579
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
344
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1,944 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
18
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
16
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
19
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
25
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
78 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
489
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
566
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
598
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
369
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2,022 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share - basic
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.72
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.75
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.51 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.03
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.63
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.74
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.77
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.47
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.61 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
earnings per share - assuming
dilution
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from continuing
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.71
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.74
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.44
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.49 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
income from discontinued
operations
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.02
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.03
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.10 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
net income attributable to
honeywell
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.63
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.73
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.76
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.47
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.59 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dividends paid per share
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3025
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3025
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3025
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.3025
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1.21 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
market price per share
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
high
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
45.27
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
48.52
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44.46
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
53.72
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
53.72 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
low
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36.87
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
39.03
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
38.53
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
43.61
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
36.87 
 
 
  
 
 


(1) for the year ended december 31, 2011,
income from discontinued operations includes a $178 million, net of tax gain,
resulting from the sale of the cpg business which funded a portion of the 2011
repositioning actions.

111




report
of independent registered public accounting firm

to the board of directors and shareholders ofhoneywell international
inc.; 

in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the
index appearing under item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of honeywell international inc. and its subsidiaries at
december 31, 2011 and 2010, and the results of their operations and their cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2011 in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states
of america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule
listed in the index appearing under item 15(a)(2) presents fairly, in all
material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction
with the related consolidated financial statements. also in our opinion, the
company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of december 31, 2011, based on criteria established in
internal control - integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the company’s management is
responsible for these financial statements and the financial statement
schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting
and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting, included in management’s report on internal control over financial
reporting under item 9a. our responsibility is to express opinions on these
financial statements, on the financial statement schedule and on the company’s
internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. our audit of internal control over financial reporting included
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the
assessed risk. our audits also included performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.

a company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company’s internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets
of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.

because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp

florham park, new jersey
february 17, 2012

112







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 9.
 
 
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
 
 


not
applicable


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 9a.
 
 
controls and procedures
 
 


honeywell
management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and
procedures as of the end of the period covered by this annual report on form
10-k. based upon that evaluation, the chief executive officer and the chief
financial officer concluded that such disclosure controls and procedures were
effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report on form
10-k to ensure information required to be disclosed in the reports that
honeywell files or submits under the exchange act is recorded, processed,
summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the securities
and exchange commission rules and forms and that it is accumulated and
communicated to our management, including our chief executive officer, our chief
financial officer and our controller, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions
regarding required disclosure. there have been no changes that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, honeywell’s internal
control over financial reporting that have occurred during the quarter ended
december 31, 2011.

management’s report on internal
control over financial reporting

honeywell
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting as defined in rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934. honeywell’s internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. honeywell’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(i)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of honeywell’s assets;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(ii)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of honeywell’s
management and directors; and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(iii)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of honeywell’s assets that could
have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
 


because of
its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

management
assessed the effectiveness of honeywell’s internal control over financial
reporting as of december 31, 2011. in making this assessment, management used
the criteria set forth by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso) in internal
control – integrated framework.

based on
this assessment, management determined that honeywell maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2011.

the
effectiveness of honeywell’s internal control over financial reporting as of
december 31, 2011 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which
is included in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data.”

113







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 9b.
 
 
other information
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
not
applicable
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 10.
 
 
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
 
 


information
relating to the directors of honeywell, as well as information relating to
compliance with section 16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, will be
contained in our definitive proxy statement involving the election of the
directors, which will be filed with the sec pursuant to regulation 14a not
later than 120 days after december 31, 2011, and such information is
incorporated herein by reference. certain other information relating to the
executive officers of honeywell appears in part i of this annual report on form
10-k under the heading “executive officers of the registrant”.

the members
of the audit committee of our board of directors are: george paz (chair), kevin
burke, scott davis, linnet deily, and judd gregg. the board has determined that
mr. paz is the “audit committee financial expert” as defined by applicable sec
rules and that mr. paz, mr. davis, and ms. deily satisfy the “accounting or
related financial management expertise” criteria established by the nyse. all
members of the audit committee are “independent” as that term is defined in
applicable sec rules and nyse listing standards.

honeywell’s
code of business conduct is available, free of charge, on our website under the
heading “investor relations” (see “corporate governance”), or by writing to
honeywell, 101 columbia road, morris township, new jersey 07962, c/o vice
president and corporate secretary. honeywell’s code of business conduct applies
to all honeywell directors, officers (including the chief executive officer, chief
financial officer and controller) and employees. amendments to or waivers of
the code of business conduct granted to any of honeywell’s directors or
executive officers will be published on our website within five business days
of such amendment or waiver.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 11.
 
 
executive compensation
 
 


information
relating to executive compensation is contained in the proxy statement referred
to above in “item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant,” and
such information is incorporated herein by reference.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 12.
 
 
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
 
 


information
relating to security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters is contained in the proxy statement referred to
above in “item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant,” and
such information is incorporated herein by reference.

equity compensation plans

as of december 31, 2011 information about our equity compensation plans
is as follows:

114







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
plan category
 
 
  
 
 
number of
shares to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options,
warrants and
rights
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
weighted-
average
exercise price
of outstanding
options,
warrants and
rights
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
number of
securities
remaining
available for
future issuance
under equity
compensation
plans (excluding
securities
reflected in
column (a))
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(a)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(b)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(c)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
equity compensation plans
approved by security holders
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
49,895,073
 
 
(1) 
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
43.01
 
 
(2) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42,195,484
 
 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
equity
compensation plans not approved by security holders
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
626,868
 
 
(4) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
n/a
 
 
(5) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
n/a
 
 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
total
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
50,521,941
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
43.01
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
42,195,484 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(1)
 
 
equity
compensation plans approved by shareowners that are included in column (a) of
the table are the 2011 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates (the “2011 stock incentive plan”), the 2006 stock
incentive plan of honeywell international inc. and its affiliates (the “2006
stock incentive plan”), the 2003 stock incentive plan of honeywell
international inc. and its affiliates (the “2003 stock incentive plan”)
and the 1993 stock plan for employees of honeywell international inc. and its
affiliates (the “1993 stock plan”) (38,562,720 shares of common stock
to be issued for options with a weighted average term of 6.27 years; 31,150
shares to be issued for stock appreciation rights (“sars”); 9,746,433
rsus subject to continued employment; 130,891 performance shares subject to
continued employment; and 1,092,879 deferred rsus of earned and vested awards
where delivery of shares has been deferred); and the 2006 stock plan for non-employee
directors of honeywell international inc. (the “2006 non-employee director
plan”) and
the 1994 stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell international
inc. (the “1994 non-employee director plan”) (322,000 shares of common
stock to be issued for options; and 9,000 rsus subject to continued services).
rsus included in column (a) of the table represent the full number of rsus awarded
and outstanding whereas the number of shares of common stock to be issued
upon vesting will be lower than what is reflected on the table due to the net
share settlement process used by the company (whereas the value of shares
required to meet employee statutory minimum tax withholding requirements are
not issued).
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
1,266,309 growth
plan units were issued for the performance cycle commencing on january 1,
2010 and ending december 31, 2011 pursuant to the 2006 stock incentive plan.
the ultimate value of any growth plan award may be paid in cash or shares of
common stock and, thus, growth plan units are not included in the table
above. the ultimate value of growth plan units depends upon the achievement
of pre-established performance goals during the two-year performance cycle.
50% of the payment related to these growth plan units will be paid in march
2012 and the remaining 50% will be paid in march 2013, subject to active
employment on the payment dates.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
because the number
of future shares that may be distributed to employees participating in the
honeywell global stock plan is unknown, no shares attributable to that plan
are included in column (a) of the table above.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
column (b) relates
to stock options and does not include any exercise price for rsus,
performance shares, or growth plan units granted to employees or non-employee
directors under equity compensation plans approved by shareowners. rsus do
not have an exercise price because their value is dependent upon attainment
of certain performance goals or continued employment or service and they are
settled for shares of common stock on a one-for-one basis. growth plan units
are denominated in cash units and the ultimate value of the award is
dependent upon attainment of certain performance goals.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(3)
 
 
the number of
shares that may be issued under the 2011 stock incentive plan as of december
31, 2011 is 39,582,132 which includes the following additional shares under
the 2011 stock incentive plan (or any prior 
 
 

115







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
plan as defined in
the 2011 stock incentive plan) that may again be available for issuance:
shares that are settled for cash, expire, are canceled, are tendered in
satisfaction of an option exercise price or tax withholding obligations, are
reacquired with cash tendered in satisfaction of an option exercise price or
with monies attributable to any tax deduction enjoyed by honeywell to the
exercise of an option, and are under any outstanding awards assumed under any
equity compensation plan of an entity acquired by honeywell. no securities
are available for future issuance under the 2006 stock incentive plan, the
2003 stock incentive plan, the 1993 stock plan, or the 1994 non-employee
director plan.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the number of
shares that may be issued under the honeywell global stock plan as of
december 31, 2011 is 2,384,352. this plan is an umbrella plan for four plans
maintained solely for eligible employees of participating non-u.s. countries.
more than 50% of the shares distributed under the honeywell global stock plan
have been distributed to participants in one sub-plan, the global employee
stock purchase plan. as of january 1, 2011, the global employee stock
purchase plan was suspended, although company matching shares awarded to
participants in 2008 vested in november 2011.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
another sub-plan
of the honeywell global stock plan, the uk sharebuilder plan, allows an
eligible uk employee to contribute a specified percentage of taxable earnings
that is then invested in shares. the company matches those shares and
dividends paid are used to purchase additional shares. the
company increased the match share percentage from 50% to 62.50% effective
march 1, 2011. matched shares are subject to a three-year vesting schedule.
shares taken out of the plan before five years lose their tax-favored status.
for the year ending december 31, 2011, 105,015 shares were credited to
participants’ accounts under the uk sharebuilder plan.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the remaining two
sub-plans of the honeywell global stock plan, the honeywell international
technologies employees share ownership plan (ireland) and the honeywell
measurex (ireland) limited group employee profit sharing scheme, allow
eligible irish employees to contribute specified percentages of base pay,
bonus or performance pay that are then invested in shares. shares must be
held in trust for at least two years and lose their tax-favored status if
they are taken out of the plan before three years. for the year ending
december 31, 2011, 23,881 shares were credited to participants’ accounts
under these two plans.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the remaining
229,000 shares included in column (c) are shares remaining for future grants
under the 2006 non-employee director plan.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(4)
 
 
equity
compensation plans not approved by shareowners that are included in the table
are the supplemental non-qualified savings plan for highly compensated
employees of honeywell international inc. and its subsidiaries, and the
alliedsignal incentive compensation plan for executive employees of
alliedsignal inc. and its subsidiaries.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the supplemental
non-qualified savings plan for highly compensated employees of honeywell
international inc. and its subsidiaries is an unfunded, non-tax qualified
plan that provides benefits equal to the employee deferrals and company matching
allocations that would have been provided under honeywell’s u.s.
tax-qualified savings plan if the internal revenue code limitations on
compensation and contributions did not apply. the company matching
contribution is credited to participants’ accounts in the form of notional
shares of common stock. the notional shares are distributed in the form of
actual shares of common stock when payments are made to participants under
the plan. the number of shares to be issued under this plan based on the value
of the notional shares as of december 31, 2011 is 592,957. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the alliedsignal
incentive compensation plan for executive employees of alliedsignal inc. and
its subsidiaries was a cash incentive compensation plan maintained by
alliedsignal inc. this plan has expired. employees were permitted to defer
receipt of a cash bonus payable under the plan and invest the deferred bonus
in notional shares of common stock. the notional shares are distributed in
the form of actual shares of common stock when payments are made to
participants under the plan. no further deferrals can be made under this
plan. the number of shares of common stock that remain to be issued under
this expired plan as of december 31, 2011 is 33,911.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the deferred
compensation plan for non-employee directors of honeywell international inc.
provides for mandatory and elective deferral of certain payments to
non-employee directors. mandatory deferrals are invested in notional shares
of common stock. directors may also invest any elective deferrals in notional
shares of common stock. because the notional shares are distributed in the
form of cash when payments are made to directors under the plan, they are not
included in the table above. 
 
 

116







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(5)
 
 
column (b) does
not include any exercise price for notional shares allocated to employees
under honeywell’s equity compensation plans not approved by shareowners
because all of these shares are notionally allocated as a matching
contribution under the non-tax qualified savings plans or as a notional
investment of deferred bonuses or fees under the cash incentive compensation
and directors’ plans as described in note 4 and are only settled for shares
of common stock on a one-for-one basis.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(6)
 
 
no securities are
available for future issuance under the alliedsignal incentive compensation
plan for executive employees of alliedsignal inc. and its subsidiaries and
the deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc. the cash incentive compensation plan has expired. all
notional investments in shares of common stock are converted to cash when
payments are made under the directors’ plan. the amount of securities
available for future issuance under the supplemental non-qualified savings
plan for highly compensated employees of honeywell international inc. and its
subsidiaries is not determinable because the number of securities that may be
issued under this plan depends upon the amount deferred to the plan by
participants in future years.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the table does not
contain information for employee benefit plans of honeywell that are intended
to meet the requirements of section 401(a) of the internal revenue code and a
small number of foreign employee benefit plans that are similar to such
section 401(a) plans.
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 13.
 
 
certain relationships and related
transactions
 
 


information
relating to certain relationships and related transactions is contained in the
proxy statement referred to above in “item 10. directors and executive officers
of the registrant,” and such information is incorporated herein by reference.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 14.
 
 
principal accounting fees and services
 
 


information
relating to fees paid to and services performed by pricewaterhousecoopers llp
in 2011 and 2010 and our audit committee’s pre-approval policies and procedures
with respect to non-audit services are contained in the proxy statement
referred to above in “item 10. directors and executive officers of the
registrant,” and such information is incorporated herein by reference.

117







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
item 15.
 
 
exhibits and financial statement schedules
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
page number
in form 10-k
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
(a)(1.) consolidated financial
statements:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
consolidated
statement of operations for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
  
 
 
56
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
consolidated
balance sheet at december 31, 2011 and 2010
 
 
  
 
 
57
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
  
 
 
58
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
consolidated
statement of shareowners’ equity for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010
and 2009
 
 
  
 
 
59
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
notes
to financial statements
 
 
  
 
 
60
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
 
 
  
 
 
112
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
page number
in form 10-k
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
(a)(2.) consolidated financial
statement schedules:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
schedule
ii—valuation and qualifying accounts
 
 
  
 
 
125
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
all other
financial statement schedules have been omitted because they are not
applicable to us or the required information is shown in the consolidated
financial statements or notes thereto.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(a)(3.) exhibits
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
see
the exhibit index of this annual report on form 10-k
 
 
  
 
 
120
 
 
  
 
 

118




signatures

pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has
duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto
duly authorized.


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
date: february 17, 2012
 
 
by:
 
 
/s/ kathleen a. winters 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
kathleen a. winters
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
vice president and controller
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(on behalf of the registrant
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
and as the registrant’s
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
principal accounting officer)
 
 


pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this annual report
has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and
in the capacities and on the date indicated:


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
name
 
 
  
 
 
name
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  


 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
david m. cote
 
 
  
 
 
linnet f. deily
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
chairman of the board,
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
chief executive officer
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and director
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
gordon m. bethune
 
 
  
 
 
clive r. hollick
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
kevin burke
 
 
  
 
 
george paz
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
jaime chico pardo
 
 
  
 
 
bradley t. sheares, ph.d.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
*
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
d. scott davis
 
 
  
 
 
judd gregg
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
director
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
/s/ david j. anderson
 
 
  
 
 
/s/ kathleen a. winters
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
david j. anderson
 
 
  
 
 
kathleen a. winters
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
senior vice president and
 
 
  
 
 
vice president and
controller
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
chief financial officer
 
 
  
 
 
(principal accounting
officer)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(principal financial
officer)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
*by:
 
 
/s/ david j. anderson
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(david j. anderson
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
attorney-in-fact)
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
february 17, 2012
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

119



exhibit index


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exhibitno.
 
 
  
 
 
description
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3(i)
 
 
  
 
 
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of
honeywell international inc., as amended april 26, 2010 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 3(i) to honeywell’s form 8-k filed april 27, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3(ii)
 
 
  
 
 
by-laws of honeywell international inc., as amended april
26, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(ii) to honeywell’s form 8-k
filed april 27, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
4
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. is a party to several
long-term debt instruments under which, in each case, the total amount of
securities authorized does not exceed 10% of the total assets of honeywell
and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. pursuant to paragraph 4(iii)(a)
of item 601(b) of regulation s-k, honeywell agrees to furnish a copy of such
instruments to the securities and exchange commission upon request.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.1*
 
 
  
 
 
2003 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates (incorporated by reference to honeywell’s proxy statement,
dated march 17, 2003, filed pursuant to rule 14a-6 of the securities and
exchange act of 1934), and amended by exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k
filed december 21, 2004, exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year
ended december 31, 2006 and exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the
year ended december 31, 2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.2*
 
 
  
 
 
deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors of
honeywell international inc., as amended and restated (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.2 to honeywell’s form 10-q for quarter ended june 30,
2003), and amended by exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed december 21,
2004 and exhibit 10.2 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2005
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.3*
 
 
  
 
 
stock plan for non-employee directors of alliedsignal
inc., as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to honeywell’s
form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2003), and amended by exhibit 10.2
to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2007 and exhibit 10.1
to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.4*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. incentive compensation plan
for executive employees, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference
to honeywell’s proxy statement, dated march 10, 2011, filed pursuant to rule
14a-6 of the securities and exchange act of 1934)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.5*
 
 
  
 
 
supplemental non-qualified savings plan for highly
compensated employees of honeywell international inc. and its subsidiaries,
as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008), and amended by
exhibit 10.5 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2010
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.6*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. severance plan for senior
executives, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.7 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008), and
amended by exhibit 10.7 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.7*
 
 
  
 
 
salary and incentive award deferral plan for selected
employees of honeywell international inc., and its affiliates, as amended and
restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.8 to honeywell’s form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 2008)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.8*
 
 
  
 
 
1993 stock plan for employees of honeywell international
inc. and its affiliates, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit a
to honeywell’s proxy statement, dated march 10, 1994, filed pursuant to rule
14a-6 of the securities and exchange act of 1934), and amended by exhibit
10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed december 21, 2004, exhibit 10.9 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for 
 
 

120







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exhibitno.
 
 
  
 
 
description
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
the year ended december 31, 2006, exhibit 10.3 to
honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2007 and exhibit 10.9 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.9*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. supplemental pension plan, as
amended and restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.10 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008), and amended by
exhibit 10.10 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.10*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. supplemental executive
retirement plan for executives in career band 6 and above, as amended and
restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.12 to honeywell’s form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 2008), and amended by exhibit 10.12 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.11*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell supplemental defined benefit retirement plan, as
amended and restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.13 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008), and amended by
exhibit 10.13 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.12*
 
 
  
 
 
letter between david j. anderson and honeywell
international inc. dated june 12, 2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.26 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2003), and
amended by exhibit 10.14 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.13*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell international inc. severance plan for corporate
staff employees (involuntary termination following a change in control), as
amended and restated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.16 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.14*
 
 
  
 
 
employment agreement dated as of february 18, 2002 between
honeywell and david m. cote (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.24 to
honeywell’s form 8-k filed march 4, 2002), and amended by exhibit 10.3 to
honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2008 and exhibit
10.17 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.15*
 
 
  
 
 
2003 stock incentive plan for employees of honeywell
international inc. and its affiliates award agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed february 7, 2005)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.16*
 
 
  
 
 
2003 stock incentive plan for employees of honeywell
international inc. and its affiliates restricted unit agreement (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.21 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2005)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.17*
 
 
  
 
 
stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc. option agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.1 to form 8-k filed april 29, 2005)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.18*
 
 
  
 
 
deferred compensation agreement dated august 4, 2006
between honeywell and david m. cote (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.22 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2006) and
amended by exhibit 10.22 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.19*
 
 
  
 
 
letter agreement dated july 27, 2001 between honeywell and
larry e. kittelberger (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.23 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2006), and amended by
exhibit 10.23 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2008
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.20*
 
 
  
 
 
honeywell supplemental retirement plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.24 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2006)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.21*
 
 
  
 
 
pittway corporation supplemental executive retirement plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.25 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the
year ended december 31, 2006) and amended by exhibit 
 
 

121







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exhibitno.
 
 
  
 
 
description
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
10.25 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2008 and exhibit 10.25 to honeywell’s 10-k for the year ended december
31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.22*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.26 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008),
and amended by exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s 10-q for the quarter ended march
31, 2011
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.23*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of option award agreement (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.2 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31,
2009)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.24*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of restricted unit agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended
march 31, 2009)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.25*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of growth plan agreement (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31,
2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.26*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates— form of performance share agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.30 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2006)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.27*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc., as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.31 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2008),
and amended by the attached amendment (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.28*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc.—form of option agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.7 to honeywell’s form10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2006)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.29*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc.—form of restricted stock agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.8 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended june
30, 2006)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.30*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock plan for non-employee directors of honeywell
international inc.—form of restricted unit agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.34 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2008)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.31*
 
 
  
 
 
2007 honeywell global employee stock plan (incorporated by
reference to honeywell’s proxy statement, dated march 12, 2007, filed
pursuant to rule 14a-6 of the securities and exchange act of 1934)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.32*
 
 
  
 
 
letter agreement dated july 20, 2007 between honeywell and
roger fradin (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form
10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2007) and amended by exhibit 10.36
to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.33*
 
 
  
 
 
consulting agreement dated march 24, 2010 between
honeywell and larry kittelberger (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2
to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.34*
 
 
  
 
 
letter agreement dated october 6, 2010 between honeywell
and roger fradin (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.34 to honeywell’s
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2010))
 
 

122







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exhibitno.
 
 
  
 
 
description
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
10.35*
 
 
  
 
 
employee non-competition agreement dated october 26, 2010
for andreas kramvis (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.35 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.36*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates — form of restricted unit agreement, form 2 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.2 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended
june 30, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.37*
 
 
  
 
 
2006 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of option award agreement, form 2 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.37 to honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.38*
 
 
  
 
 
letter agreement dated september 3, 2009 between honeywell
and timothy mahoney (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.38 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.39*
 
 
  
 
 
form of honeywell international inc. noncompete agreement
for senior executives (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.39 to
honeywell’s form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2010))
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.40*
 
 
  
 
 
2011 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates (incorporated by reference to honeywell’s proxy statement,
dated march 10, 2011, filed pursuant to rule 14a-6 of the securities and
exchange act of 1934)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.41*
 
 
  
 
 
2011 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of restricted unit agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.2 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended june
30, 2011)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.42*
 
 
  
 
 
2011 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of option award agreement (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.43*
 
 
  
 
 
2011 stock incentive plan of honeywell international inc.
and its affiliates—form of growth plan agreement (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.44*
 
 
  
 
 
letter agreement dated august 4, 2011 between honeywell
international inc. and david m. cote (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.1 to honeywell’s form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2011)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.45
 
 
  
 
 
five year credit agreement dated as of march 31, 2011 by
and among honeywell international inc., the banks, financial institutions and
other institutional lenders parties thereto, citibank, n.a., as
administrative agent, citibank international plc, as swing line agent,
jpmorgan chase bank, n.a., as syndication agent, bank of america, n.a.,
barclays bank plc, deutsche bank ag new york branch, goldman sachs bank usa,
morgan stanley mufg loan partners, llc and the royal bank of scotland plc, as
documentation agents, and citigroup global markets inc. and j.p. morgan
securities llc, as joint lead arrangers and co- book managers (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s 8-k filed april 4, 2011)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.46
 
 
  
 
 
purchase and sale agreement between catalysts, adsorbents
and process systems, inc., and honeywell specialty materials, llc, dated
september 30, 2005 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.23 to honeywell’s
form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2005)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.47
 
 
  
 
 
stock purchase agreement by and between honeywell
international inc. and m&f worldwide corp. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 2.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed november 1, 2005)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.48
 
 
  
 
 
stock purchase agreement dated april 3, 2008 by and among
honeywell international inc., safety products holdings, inc., the selling
shareholders party thereto, and odyssey investment services, l.l.c.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed
april 7, 2008)
 
 

123







 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exhibitno.
 
 
  
 
 
description
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
 
10.49
 
 
  
 
 
stock and asset purchase agreement dated june 9, 2008, by
and between honeywell international inc. and be aerospace, inc. (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form 8-k filed june 11, 2008)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.50
 
 
  
 
 
tender offer agreement dated may 19, 2010 by and among
sperian protection s.a., honeywell international inc. and honeywell holding
france sas (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s form
10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2010)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
10.51
 
 
  
 
 
stock and asset purchase agreement dated january 27, 2011
by and among honeywell international inc., rank group limited and autoparts
holdings limited, (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to honeywell’s
form 8-k filed january 31, 2011)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
12
 
 
  
 
 
statement re: computation of ratio of earnings to fixed
charges (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
21
 
 
  
 
 
subsidiaries of the registrant (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
23
 
 
  
 
 
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
powers of attorney (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
31.1
 
 
  
 
 
certification of principal executive officer pursuant to
section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
31.2
 
 
  
 
 
certification of principal financial officer pursuant to
section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
32.1
 
 
  
 
 
certification of principal executive officer pursuant to
18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
32.2
 
 
  
 
 
certification of principal financial officer pursuant to
18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 (filed herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.ins
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl instance document (furnished herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.sch
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl taxonomy extension schema (furnished herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.cal
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase (furnished
herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.def
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase (furnished
herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.lab
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase (furnished
herewith)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101.pre
 
 
  
 
 
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase (furnished
herewith)
 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the exhibits identified above
with an asterisk (*) are management contracts or compensatory plans or
arrangements.
 
 

124




honeywell
international inc. 
schedule ii - valuation and
qualifying accounts
three years ended december 31, 2011
(dollars in millions)


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
allowance
for doubtful accounts:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2008
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
182
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
provision
charged to income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
176
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deductions
from reserves
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(134
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
6
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
230
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
provision
charged to income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
145
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deductions
from reserves
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(111
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
8
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
272
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
provision
charged to income
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
79
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deductions
from reserves
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(112
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
acquisitions
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
14
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
253
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 





 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deferred
tax assets—valuation allowance
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2008
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
445
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
142
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reductions
credited to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(30
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax assets due to expiring nols
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
3
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax assets due to capital loss carryforwards
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(9
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
27
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2009
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
578
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
129
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reductions
credited to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(90
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax asset due to expired nol
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(7
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax assets due to capital loss carryforwards
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(1
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(17
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to goodwill
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
44
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2010
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
636
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
109
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
reductions
credited to income tax expense
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(152
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax asset due to expired nol
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(8
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
reductions
charged to deferred tax assets due to capital loss carryforwards
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(5
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to equity
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(13
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
additions
charged to goodwill
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
24
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 
 
 
balance
december 31, 2011
 
 
  
 
 
$
 
 
591
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

 
  

 
  

 
 

125