10-K
1
gtx-10k_20191231.htm
10-K





gtx-10k_20191231.htm

bazadebezolkohpepadr="1888659890"



 
ffff
 
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
 
FORM 10-K
 
(Mark One)




☒

ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019
or




☐

TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from            to           
Commission File Number 001-38636
 
Garrett Motion Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 




Delaware

 

82-4873189



(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)

 

(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)



La Pièce 16, Rolle, Switzerland

 

1180



(Address of Principal Executive Offices)

 

(Zip Code)


 
+41 21 695 30 00 
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 




Title of each class

Trading Symbol(s)

Name of each exchange on which registered



Common Stock, $0.001 par value per share

GTX

New York Stock Exchange


 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.  ☒  Yes     ☐  No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.         ☐  Yes    ☒  No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    ☒  Yes    ☐  No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).    ☒  Yes   ☐  No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
 




Large accelerated filer

☒

 

Accelerated filer

☐



Non-accelerated filer

☐

 

Smaller reporting company

☐



Emerging growth company

☐

 

 

 


 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes ☐ No ☒ 
As of June 28, 2019, the last business day of  the registrant’s most recently completed second quarter, the approximate market value of  the registrant’s common  stock held by non-affiliates was $1.141 billion. As of February 25, 2020, the registrant had 74,830,133 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value, outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The following documents are incorporated by reference into the Annual Report on Form 10-K: Portions of the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for its 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Table of Contents
 




 

 

Page



PART I

 

 



Item 1.

Business

6



Item 1A.

Risk Factors

16



Item 1B. 

Unresolved Staff Comments

34



Item 2.

Properties

35



Item 3.

Legal Proceedings

35



Item 4.

Mine Safety Disclosures

36



PART II

 

 



Item 5.

Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities

37



Item 6.

Selected Financial Data

39



Item 7.

Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations

43



Item 7A.

Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risks

57



Item 8.

Financial Statements and Supplementary Data

58



 

Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations

62



 

Consolidated and Combined Statements of Comprehensive Income

63



 

Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets

64



 

Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows

65



 

Consolidated and Combined Statements of Equity (Deficit)

66



 

Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements

67



Item 9.

Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure

108



Item 9A.

Controls and Procedures

108



Item 9B.

Other Information

109



PART III

 

 



Item 10.

Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance

110



Item 11.

Executive Compensation

113



Item 12.

Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters

114



Item 13.

Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence

115



Item 14.

Principal Accountant Fees and Services

115



PART IV

 

 



Item 15.

Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules

116



Item 16.

Form 10- K Summary

118



Signatures

119


 
2

 
BASIS OF PRESENTATION
On October 1, 2018 (the “Distribution Date”), Garrett Motion Inc. became an independent publicly-traded company through a pro rata distribution (the “Distribution”) by Honeywell International Inc. (“Former Parent” or “Honeywell”) of 100% of the then-outstanding shares of Garrett to Honeywell’s stockholders (the “Spin-Off”). Each Honeywell stockholder of record received one share of Garrett common stock for every 10 shares of Honeywell common stock held on the record date. Approximately 74 million shares of Garrett common stock were distributed on October 1, 2018 to Honeywell stockholders. In connection with the Spin-Off, Garrett´s common stock began trading “regular-way” under the ticker symbol “GTX” on the New York Stock Exchange on October 1, 2018.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Garrett,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and “the Company” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K refer to (i) Honeywell’s Transportation Systems Business (the “Transportation Systems Business” or the “Business”) prior to the Spin-Off and (ii) Garrett Motion Inc. and its subsidiaries following the Spin-Off, as applicable.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains financial information that was derived partially from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Honeywell. The accompanying consolidated and combined financial statements of Garrett (“Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements”) reflect the consolidated and combined historical results of operations, financial position and cash flows of Garrett, for periods following the Spin-Off, and the Transportation Systems Business, for all periods prior to the Spin-Off, as it was historically managed in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). Therefore, the historical consolidated and combined financial information may not be indicative of our future performance and does not necessarily reflect what our consolidated and combined results of operations, financial condition and cash flows would have been had the Business operated as a separate, publicly traded company during the entirety of the periods presented, particularly because of changes that we have experienced, and expect to continue to experience in the future, as a result of our separation from Honeywell, including changes in the financing, cash management, operations, cost structure and personnel needs of our business.
3

 
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. We intend such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). All statements other than statements of historical fact contained in this Annual Report, including without limitation statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, expectations regarding the growth of the turbocharger, electric vehicle and connected vehicle markets, the sufficiency of our cash and cash equivalents, anticipated sources and uses of cash, our business strategy, anticipated payments under our agreements with Honeywell, anticipated interest expense, and the plans and objectives of management for future operations and capital expenditures are forward-looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other important factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “could,” “intend,” “target,” “project,” “contemplate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other similar expressions. The forward-looking statements in this Annual Report are only predictions. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report and are subject to a number of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements, including:




 

1.

changes in the automotive industry and economic or competitive conditions; 




 

2.

our ability to develop new technologies and products, and the development of either effective alternative turbochargers or new replacement technologies;




 

3.

failure to protect our intellectual property or allegations that we have infringed the intellectual property of others; and our ability to license necessary intellectual property from third parties; 




 

4.

potential material losses and costs as a result of any warranty claims and product liability actions brought against us; 




 

5.

significant failure or inability to comply with the specifications and manufacturing requirements of our original equipment manufacturer customers or by increases or decreases to the inventory levels maintained by our customers; 




 

6.

volume of products we produce and market demand for such products and prices we charge and the margins we realize from our sales of our products; 




 

7.

loss of or a significant reduction in purchases by our largest customers, material nonpayment or nonperformance by any our key customers, and difficulty collecting receivables;




 

8.

inaccuracies in estimates of volumes of awarded business; 




 

9.

work stoppages, other disruptions or the need to relocate any of our facilities; 




 

10.

supplier dependency;




 

11.

failure to meet our minimum delivery requirements under our supply agreements;




 

12.

failure to increase productivity or successfully execute repositioning projects or manage our workforce; 




 

13.

potential material environmental liabilities and hazards; 




 

14.

natural disasters and physical impacts of climate change;




 

15.

pandemics, including without limitation the coronavirus, and effects on our workforce and supply chain;




 

16.

technical difficulties or failures, including cybersecurity risks; 




 

17.

the outcome of and costs associated with pending and potential material litigation matters, including our pending lawsuit against Honeywell;




 

18.

changes in legislation or government regulations or policies; 
4

 




 

19.

risks related to international operations and our investment in foreign markets, including risks related to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, or Brexit;




 

20.

risks related to our agreements with Honeywell, such as the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement and Tax Matters Agreement; 




 

21.

the terms of our indebtedness and our ability to access capital markets;




 

22.

unforeseen adverse tax effects; 




 

23.

costs related to operating as a standalone public company and failure to achieve benefits expected from the Spin-Off; 




 

24.

inability to recruit and retain qualified personnel; and 




 

25.

the other factors described under the caption "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” and in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). 
You should read this Annual Report and the documents that we reference in this Annual Report completely and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We qualify all of our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements. Except as required by applicable law, we do not plan to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements contained herein, whether as a result of any new information, future events, changed circumstances or otherwise.
 
5

 
Part I
 
Item 1. Business
Our Company
Our Company designs, manufactures and sells highly engineered turbocharger, electric-boosting and connected vehicle technologies for original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and the aftermarket. We are a global technology leader with significant expertise in delivering products across gasoline, diesel, natural gas and electrified (hybrid and fuel cell) powertrains.
Our products are highly engineered for each individual powertrain platform, requiring close collaboration with our customers in the earliest years of powertrain and new vehicle design. Our turbocharging and electric-boosting products enable our customers to improve vehicle performance while addressing continually evolving and converging regulations that mandate significant increases in fuel efficiency and reductions in exhaust emissions worldwide. 
We offer light vehicle gasoline, light vehicle diesel and commercial vehicle turbochargers that enhance vehicle performance, fuel economy and drivability. A turbocharger provides an engine with a controlled and pressurized air intake, which intensifies and improves the combustion of fuel to increase the amount of power sent through the transmission and to improve the efficiency and exhaust emissions of the engine. Market penetration of vehicles with a turbocharger is expected to increase from approximately 51% in 2019 to approximately 56% by 2023, according to IHS and other industry sources, which we believe will allow our business to grow at a faster rate than overall automobile production. 
Building on our expertise in turbocharger technology, we have also developed electric-boosting technologies targeted for use in electrified powertrains, primarily hybrid and fuel cell vehicles. Our products include electric turbochargers and electric compressors that provide more responsive driving and optimized fuel economy in electrified vehicles. Our early-stage and collaborative relationships with our global OEM customer base have enabled us to increase our knowledge of customer needs for vehicle safety, predictive maintenance, and advanced controllers to develop new connected and software-enabled products.
In addition, we have emerging opportunities in technologies, products and services that support the growing connected vehicle market, which include software focused on automotive cybersecurity and integrated vehicle health management (“IVHM”). Our focus is developing solutions for enhancing cybersecurity of connected vehicles, as well as in-vehicle monitoring to provide maintenance diagnostics, which reduce vehicle downtime and repair costs. For example, our Intrusion Detection and Prevention System uses anomaly detection technology that functions like virus detection software to perform real-time data analysis to ensure every message received by a car’s computer is valid. Our IVHM tools detect intermittent faults and anomalies within complex vehicle systems to provide a more thorough understanding of the real-time health of a vehicle system and enable customers to fix faults before they actually occur. We are collaborating with tier-one suppliers on automotive cybersecurity software solutions and with several major OEMs on IVHM technologies.
Our comprehensive portfolio of turbocharger, electric-boosting and connected vehicle technologies is supported by our five research and development (“R&D”) centers, 14 close-to-customer engineering facilities and 13 factories, which are strategically located around the world. Our operations in each region have self-sufficient sales, engineering and production capabilities, making us a nimble local competitor, while our standardized manufacturing processes, global supply chain, worldwide technology R&D and size enable us to deliver the scale benefits, technology leadership, cross-regional support and extensive resources of a global enterprise. In high-growth regions, including China and India, we have established a local footprint, which has helped us secure strong positions with in-region OEM customers who demand localized engineering and manufacturing content but also require the capabilities and track record of a global leader.
We also sell our technologies in the global aftermarket through our distribution network of more than 190 distributors covering 160 countries. Through this network, we provide approximately 5,300 part-numbers and products to service garages across the globe. Garrett is a leading brand in the independent aftermarket for both service replacement turbochargers as well as high-end performance and racing turbochargers. We estimate that over 100 million vehicles on the road today utilize our products, further supporting our global aftermarket business. 
6

 
Leading technology, continuous innovation, product performance and OEM engineering collaboration are central to our customer value proposition and a core part of our culture and heritage. In 1962, we introduced a turbocharger for a mass-produced passenger vehicle. Since then, we have introduced many other notable technologies in mass-production vehicles, such as turbochargers with variable geometry turbines, dual-boost compressors, ball-bearing rotors and electronically actuated controls, all of which vastly improve engine response when accelerating at low speeds and increase power at higher speeds and enable significant improvements in overall engine fuel economy and exhaust emissions for both gasoline and diesel engines. Our portfolio today includes more than 1,400 patents and patents pending.
Revenue Summary
 




 

By Geography

 











 







By Product-line







 




 

•

We are a global business that generated revenues of approximately $3.2 billion in 2019.




 

•

In 2019, light vehicle products (products for passenger cars, SUVs, light trucks, and other products) accounted for approximately 67% of our revenues. Commercial vehicle products (products for on-highway trucks and off-highway trucks, construction, agriculture and power-generation machines) accounted for 19%.




 

•

In 2019, our OEM sales contributed approximately 86% of our revenues while our aftermarket and other products contributed 14%.




 

•

Approximately 56% of our 2019 revenues came from sales shipped from Europe, 28% from sales shipped from Asia and 15% from sales shipped from North America. For more information, see Note 26 Concentrations of the Notes to our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
7

 
Our Industry
We compete in the global turbocharger market for gasoline, diesel and natural gas engines; in the electric- boosting market for electrified (hybrid and fuel cell) vehicle powertrains; and in the emerging connected vehicle software market. As vehicles become more electrified, our electric-boosting products use principles similar to our turbochargers to further optimize air intake and thus further enhance performance, fuel economy and exhaust emissions with the help of an integrated high-speed electric motor. By using a turbocharger or electric-boosting technology, an OEM can deploy smaller, lighter powertrains with better fuel economy and exhaust emissions while delivering the same power and acceleration as larger, heavier powertrains. As such, turbochargers have become one of the most highly effective technologies for helping global OEMs meet increasingly stricter emission standards.
Throughout this section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we reference certain industry sources. While we believe the compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”) and other projections of the industry sources referenced in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are reasonable, forecasts based upon such data involve inherent uncertainties, and actual outcomes are subject to change based upon various factors beyond our control.
Global Turbocharger market
The global turbocharger market includes turbochargers for new light and commercial vehicles as well as turbochargers for replacement use in the global aftermarket. According to IHS and other industry sources, the global turbocharger market consisted of approximately 50 million unit sales with an estimated total value of approximately $11 billion in 2019. Within the global turbocharger market, light vehicles accounted for approximately 90% of total unit volume and commercial vehicles accounted for the remaining 10%.
IHS and other industry sources project that the turbocharger production volume will grow at a CAGR of approximately 4% from 2019 through 2023, driven by double-digit growth in turbochargers for light vehicle gasoline engines and continued low single-digit growth for commercial vehicles, offset by a modest decline in diesel turbochargers given a decline in diesel powertrains, particularly for light vehicles. This annual sales estimate would add approximately 222 million turbocharged vehicles on the road globally between 2019 and 2023.
Key trends affecting our industry
Global vehicle fuel efficiency and emissions standards. OEMs are facing increasingly strict constraints for vehicle fuel efficiency and emissions standards globally. Regulatory authorities in key vehicle markets such as the United States, the European Union, China, Japan, and Korea have instituted regulations that require sustained and significant improvements in CO2, NOx and particulate matter vehicle emissions. OEMs are required to evaluate and adopt various solutions to address these stricter standards. Turbochargers allow OEMs to reduce engine size without sacrificing vehicle performance, thereby increasing fuel efficiency and decreasing harmful emissions. Furthermore, turbochargers allow more precise “air control” over both engine intake and exhaust conditions such as gas pressures, flows and temperatures, enabling optimization of the combustion process. This combustion optimization is critical to engine efficiency, exhaust emissions, power and transient response and enables such concepts as exhaust gas recirculation for diesel engines and Miller-cycle operation for gasoline engines. Consequently, we believe turbocharging will continue to be a key technology for automakers to meet future tough fuel economy and emissions standards without sacrificing performance.
Turbocharger penetration. The utilization of turbochargers and electric-boosting technologies on vehicle powertrain systems is one of the most cost-effective solutions to address stricter standards, and OEMs are increasing their adoption of these technologies. IHS and other industry sources expect turbocharger penetration to increase globally from approximately 51% in 2019 to approximately 56% by 2023. IHS forecasts particularly strong turbocharger penetration growth for gasoline turbochargers, expecting an increase from approximately 40% in 2019 to 52% in 2023.
Growth in overall vehicle production. After a decrease of 6% in Light Vehicle production and 2% in On Highway Commercial Vehicle production in 2019, we expect a stabilization in 2020, followed by recovery in the coming years with a modest CAGR of about 1% to 2%. The shift from pure gasoline and diesel internal combustion engines to hybridized powertrains will continue in response to increasingly strict fuel efficiency and regulatory standards. In parallel, the share of pure electric vehicles will continue to increase from a low base as technology and supporting infrastructure continue to improve. 
8

 
Medium-Term Powertrain Trends
 

 
Source: IHS
Engine size and complexity. In order to address stricter fuel economy standards, OEMs have used turbochargers to reduce the average engine size on their vehicles over time without compromising performance. Stricter pollutants emissions standards (primarily for NOx and particulates) have driven higher turbocharger adoption as well, which we believe will continue in the future, with a predicted total automotive turbocharger sales volume CAGR of 4% between 2019 and 2023, in an industry with a predicted total automobile sales volume CAGR of approximately 2% over the same period, in each case according to IHS and other industry sources. In addition, increasingly demanding fuel economy standards require continuous increases in turbocharger technology content (e.g., variable geometry, electronic actuation, multiple stages, ball bearings, electrical control, etc.) which results in steady increases in average turbocharger content per vehicle.
Powertrain electrification. To address stricter fuel economy standards, OEMs also have been increasing the electrification of their vehicle offerings, primarily with the addition of hybrid vehicles, which have powertrains equipped with a gasoline or diesel internal combustion engine in combination with an electric motor. IHS estimates that hybrid vehicles globally will grow from a total of approximately 5.3 million vehicles in 2019 to a total of approximately 23.2 million vehicles by 2023, representing a CAGR of 45%. The electrified powertrain of hybrid vehicles enables the usage of highly synergistic electric-boosting technologies which augment standard turbochargers with electrically assisted boosting and electrical-generation capability. Furthermore, the application of electric boosting extends the requirement for engineering collaboration with OEMs to include electrical integration, software controls, and advanced sensing. Overall, this move to electric boosting further increases the role and value of turbocharging in improving vehicle fuel economy and exhaust emissions.
OEMs are also investing in full battery-electric vehicles, which have gained in popularity in recent years. However, IHS and other industry sources expect that they will compose only 7% of total vehicle production globally by 2023 due to their inherent limitations in driving range and recharging time and their relatively high cost. As OEMs strive to solve the issues of full battery electric vehicles, they are increasing investment in hydrogen fuel cell powered electric vehicles. These vehicles, like battery electric vehicles, have fully electric motor powertrains, but they rely on the hydrogen fuel cell to generate the required electricity. The hydrogen fuel cell also requires advanced electric-boosting technology for optimization of size and efficiency.
Connected vehicles, autonomous vehicles, and shared vehicles. In addition to powertrain evolution, the market for connected vehicles services is growing rapidly. According to Strategy&, a consulting firm, this market is expected to grow 34% per annum from approximately $4 billion in 2018 to approximately $34 billion in 2025. Our IVHM, predictive maintenance, diagnostics and cybersecurity tools address this market. Their adoption should increase as advanced driver assistance features and ultimately autonomous driving increase requirements for vehicle functional safety. Simultaneously, our cybersecurity solutions protect those vehicles against outside interference to ensure correct functionality.
9

 
Vehicle ownership in China and other high-growth markets. Vehicle ownership in China and other emerging markets remains well below ownership levels in developed markets and will be a key driver of future vehicle production. At the same time, these markets are following the lead of developed countries by instituting stricter emission standards. Growth in production volume and greater penetration by large global OEMs in these markets, along with evolving emission standards and increasing fuel economy and vehicle performance demands, is driving increasing turbocharger penetration in high-growth regions.
Our Competitive Strengths
We believe that we differentiate ourselves through the following competitive strengths:
Global and broad market leadership
We are a global leader in the $11 billion turbocharger industry. We believe we will continue to benefit from the increased adoption of turbochargers, as well as our global technology leadership, comprehensive portfolio, continuous product innovation and our deep-seated relationships with all global OEMs. We maintain a leadership position across all vehicle types, engine types and regions, including:
Light Vehicles.




 

•

Gasoline: The global adoption of turbochargers by OEMs on gasoline engines has increased rapidly from approximately 14% in 2013 to approximately 40% in 2019 and is forecasted by IHS to increase to 52% by 2023. We have launched a leading modern 1.5L variable geometry turbo (“VNT”) gasoline application, which we believe to be among the first with a major OEM, and we expect to see increasing adoption of this technology in years to come. Key to our strategy for gasoline growth is to leverage our technology strengths in high-temperature materials and variable geometry as well as our scale, global footprint and in-market capabilities to meet the volume demands of global OEMs.




 

•

Diesel: We have a long history of technology leadership in diesel engine turbochargers. Despite diesel market weakness for some vehicle segments, the majority of our diesel turbochargers revenue comes from heavier and bigger vehicles like SUVs, pickup trucks and light commercial vehicles (such as delivery vans), which remain a stable part of the diesel market. Diesel maintains a unique advantage in terms of fuel consumption, hence cost of ownership, and towing capacity makes it still the powertrain of choice for heavier vehicle applications. Diesel also remains essential for OEMs to meet their CO2 fleet average regulatory target going forward, as diesel vehicles produce approximately 10-15% less CO2, on average, than gasoline vehicles.




 

•

Electrified vehicles. We provide a comprehensive portfolio of turbocharger and electric-boosting technologies to manufacturers of hybrid-electric and fuel cell vehicles. OEMs have increased their adoption of these electrified technologies given regulatory standards and consumer demands driving an expected CAGR globally of approximately 43% from 2019 to 2023, according to IHS. Similar to turbochargers for gasoline and diesel engines, turbochargers for hybrid vehicles are an essential component of maximizing fuel efficiency and overall engine performance. Our products provide OEMs with solutions that further optimize engine performance and position us well to serve OEMs as they add more electrified vehicles into their fleets.
Commercial vehicles. Our Company traces its roots to the 1950s when we helped develop a turbocharged commercial vehicle for Caterpillar. We have maintained our strategic relationship with key commercial vehicle OEMs for over 60 years as well as market-leading positions across the commercial vehicle markets for both on- and off-highway use. Our products improve engine performance and lower emissions on trucks, buses, agriculture equipment, construction equipment and mining equipment with engine sizes ranging 1.8L to 105L.
High-growth regions. We have a strong track record serving global and emerging OEMs, including customers in China and India, with an in-market, for-market strategy and operate full R&D and three manufacturing facilities in the high-growth regions that serve light and commercial vehicle OEMs. Our local presence in high-growth regions has helped us win business with key international and domestic Chinese OEMs, and we have grown between 2013 and 2018 significantly faster than the vehicle production in these regions.
10

 
Strong and collaborative relationships with leading OEMs globally
We supply our products to more than 60 OEMs globally. Our top ten customers accounted for approximately 60% of net sales and our largest customer represents approximately 12% of our net sales in 2019. With over 60 years in the turbocharger industry, we have developed strong capabilities working with all major OEMs. We consistently meet their stringent design, performance and quality standards while achieving capacity and delivery timelines that are critical for customer success. Our track record of successful collaborations, as demonstrated by our strong client base and our ability to successfully launch approximately 100 product applications annually, is well recognized. For example, we received a 2017 Automotive News PACE™ Innovation Partnership Award in supporting Volkswagen’s first launch of an industry-leading VNT turbocharged gasoline engine, which is just one example of our strong collaborative relationships with OEMs. Our regional research, development and manufacturing capabilities are a key advantage in helping us to supply OEMs as they expand geographically and shift towards standardized engines and vehicle platforms globally.
Global aftermarket platform
We have an estimated installed base of over 100 million vehicles that utilize our products through our global network of more than 190 distributors covering 160 countries. Our Garrett aftermarket brand has strong recognition across distributors and garages globally, and is known for boosting performance, quality and reliability. Our aftermarket business has historically provided a stable stream of revenue supported by our large installed base. As turbo penetration rates continue to increase, we expect that our installed base and aftermarket opportunity will grow.
Highly-engineered portfolio with continuous product innovation
We have led the revolution in turbocharging technology over the last 60 years and maintain a leading technology portfolio of more than 1,400 patents and patents pending. We have a globally deployed team of more than 1,200 engineers across five R&D centers and 14 close-to-customer engineering centers. Our engineers have led the mainstream commercialization of several leading turbocharger innovations, including variable geometry turbines, dual-boost compressors, ball-bearing rotors, electrically actuated controls and air-bearing electric compressors for hydrogen fuel cells. We maintain a culture of continuous product innovation, introducing about ten new technologies per year and upgrading our existing key product lines approximately every 3 years. Outside of our turbocharger product lines, we apply this culture of continuous innovation to meet the needs of our customers in new areas, particularly in connected automotive technologies. We are developing solutions, including IVHM and cybersecurity software solutions, that leverage our knowledge of vehicle powertrains and experience working closely with OEM manufacturers.
Global and low cost manufacturing footprint with operational excellence
Our geographic footprint locates R&D, engineering and manufacturing capabilities close to our customers, enabling us to tailor technologies and products for the specific vehicle types sold in each geographic market. In all regions where we operate, we leverage low-cost sourcing through our robust supplier development program, which continually works to develop new suppliers that are able to meet our specific quality, productivity and cost requirements. We now source more than two-thirds of our materials from low-cost countries and believe our high-quality, low-cost supplier network to be a significant competitive advantage. We have invested heavily to bring differentiated local capabilities to our customers in high-growth regions, including China and India.
We manufacture more than 86% of our products in low-cost countries, including seven manufacturing facilities in China, India, Mexico, Romania and Slovakia. We have a long-standing culture of lean manufacturing excellence and continuous productivity improvement. We believe global uniformity and operational excellence across facilities is a key competitive advantage in our industry given that OEM engine platforms are often designed centrally but manufactured locally, requiring suppliers to meet the exact same specifications across all locations.
Our Growth Strategies
We seek to continue to expand our business by employing the following business strategies:
11

 
Strengthen market leadership across core powertrain technologies
We are focused on strengthening our market position in light vehicles:




 

•

Gasoline turbochargers, which historically lagged adoption of diesel turbochargers, are expected to grow at an 8% annual CAGR from 2019 to 2023, according to IHS, exceeding the growth of diesel turbochargers. We expect to benefit from this higher growth given the gasoline platforms we have been awarded over the past several years. We have launched the first modern 1.5L VNT gasoline application with a major OEM and we expect to see increasing adoption of this technology in years to come. Key to our strategy for gasoline growth is our plan to leverage our technology strengths in high temperature materials and variable geometry technologies as well as our scale, global footprint and in-region capabilities to meet the volume demands of global OEMs.




 

•

We believe growth in our share of the diesel turbochargers market will be driven by new product introductions focused on emissions-enforcement technologies and supported by our favorable positioning with large vehicles and high-growth regions within this market. The more stringent emissions standards require higher turbocharger technology content such as variable geometry, 2-stage systems, advanced bearings and materials which increase our content per vehicle. We expect to grow our commercial vehicle business through new product introductions and targeted platform wins with key on-highway customers and underserved OEMs.
Strengthen our penetration of electrified vehicle boosting technologies
We stand to benefit from the increased adoption of hybrid-electric and fuel cell vehicles and the increased need for turbochargers associated with increased sales volumes for these engine types. IHS estimates that the global production of electrified vehicles will increase from approximately 7 million vehicles in 2019 to approximately 30 million vehicles by 2023, representing an annualized growth rate of approximately 43%. OEMs will need to further improve engine performance for their increasingly electrified offerings, and our comprehensive portfolio of turbocharger and electric-boosting technologies are designed to help OEMs do so. We expect to continue to invest in product innovations and new technologies and believe that we are well positioned to continue to be a technology-leader in the propulsion of electrified vehicles.
Increase market position in high-growth regions
IHS expects vehicle production in emerging markets to grow at an estimated CAGR of approximately 4% from 2019 to 2023. We are closely monitoring the current novel coronavirus outbreak and its implications for the auto industry both within and outside China. We expect this outbreak to affect the auto industry primarily in 2020. We currently do not expect a long-term impact on industry demand beyond 2021. We plan to continue to strengthen our relationships with OEMs in high-growth, emerging regions by demonstrating our technology leadership through our local research, development and manufacturing capabilities. Our local footprint is expected to continue to provide a strong competitive edge in high-growth regions due to our ability to work closely with OEMs throughout all stages of the product lifecycle including aftermarket support. For example, in China, our research center in Shanghai, our manufacturing facilities in Wuhan and Shanghai and our more than 950 employees support our differentiated end-to-end capabilities and we believe will continue to support key platform wins in the Chinese market. Our operations in China are expected to continue to benefit us as OEMs build global platforms in low cost regions. Our commitment to providing high-touch technology support to OEMs has allowed us to be recognized as a local player in other key high-growth regions, such as India.
Grow our aftermarket business
We have an opportunity to strengthen our global network of more than 190 distributors in 160 countries by deepening our channel penetration, leveraging our well-recognized Garrett brand, utilizing new online technologies for customer engagement and sales, and widening the product portfolio. For example, we have launched a global web-based platform providing self-service tools aimed at connecting 20,000 garage technicians in 2019.
12

 
Drive continuous product innovation across connected vehicles
We are actively investing in software and services that leverage our capabilities in powertrains, vehicle performance management, and electrical/mechanical design to capitalize on the growth relating to connected vehicles. Approximately 35% of passenger vehicles sold globally in 2015 were estimated to be connected in some way to the Internet. By the end of the decade, that number is expected to exceed 90%. Building on the software and connected vehicle capabilities of our Former Parent, we have assembled a team of engineers, software and technical experts and have opened new design centers in North America, India and Czech Republic. We continue to conduct research to determine key areas of the market where we are best positioned to leverage our existing technology platforms and capabilities to serve our customers. We execute a portion of our connectivity investment in collaboration with OEMs and other Tier 1 suppliers and have multiple early-stage trials with customers underway.
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
We maintain technical engineering centers in major automotive production regions of the world to develop and provide advanced products, process and manufacturing support to all of our manufacturing sites, and to provide our customers with local engineering capabilities and design developments on a global basis. As of December 31, 2019, we employed approximately 1,200 engineers. Our total R&D expenses were $129 million, $128 million and $119 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
We currently hold approximately 1,400 patents and patents pending. While no individual patent or group of patents, taken alone, is considered material to our business, taken in the aggregate, these patents provide meaningful protection for our intellectual property.
Materials
The most significant raw materials we use to manufacture our products are grey iron, aluminum, stainless steel and a nickel-, iron- and chromium-based alloy. As of December 31, 2019, we have not experienced any significant shortage of raw materials and normally do not carry inventories of such raw materials in excess of those reasonably required to meet our production and shipping schedules.
Customers
Our global customer base includes nine of the ten largest light vehicle OEMs and nine of the ten largest commercial vehicle engine makers.
Our ten largest applications in 2019 were with seven different OEMs. OEM sales were approximately 86% of our 2019 revenues while our aftermarket and other products contributed 14%.
Our largest customer is Ford Motor Company (“Ford”). In 2019, 2018 and 2017, Ford accounted for 12%, 13%, and 14%, respectively, of our total sales. 
Supply Relationships with Our Customers
We typically supply products to our OEM customers through “open” purchase orders, which are generally governed by terms and conditions negotiated with each OEM. Although the terms and conditions vary from customer to customer, they typically contemplate a relationship under which our customers are not required to purchase a minimum amount of product from us. These relationships typically extend over the life of the related engine platform. Prices are negotiated with respect to each business award, which may be subject to adjustments under certain circumstances, such as commodity or foreign exchange escalation/de-escalation clauses or for cost reductions achieved by us. The terms and conditions typically provide that we are subject to a warranty on the products supplied. We may also be obligated to share in all or a part of recall costs if the OEM recalls its vehicles for defects attributable to our products.
Individual purchase orders are terminable for cause or non-performance and, in most cases, upon our insolvency and certain change of control events. In addition, many of our OEM customers have the option to terminate for convenience on certain programs, which permits our customers to impose pressure on pricing during the life of the vehicle program, and issue purchase contracts for less than the duration of the vehicle program, which potentially reduces our profit margins and increases the risk of our losing future sales under those purchase contracts. We manufacture, and ship based on customer release schedules, normally provided on a weekly basis, which can vary due to cyclical automobile production or inventory levels throughout the supply chain.
13

 
Although customer programs typically extend to future periods, and although there is an expectation that we will supply certain levels of OEM production during such future periods, customer agreements including applicable terms and conditions do not necessarily constitute firm orders. Firm orders are generally limited to specific and authorized customer purchase order releases placed with our manufacturing and distribution centers for actual production and order fulfillment. Firm orders are typically fulfilled as promptly as possible from the conversion of available raw materials, sub-components and work-in-process inventory for OEM orders and from current on-hand finished goods inventory for aftermarket orders. The dollar amount of such purchase order releases on hand and not processed at any point in time is not believed to be significant based upon the time frame involved.
Regulatory and Environmental Compliance
We are subject to the requirements of environmental and health and safety laws and regulations in each country in which we operate. These include, among other things, laws regulating air emissions, water discharge, hazardous materials and waste management. We have an environmental management structure designed to facilitate and support our compliance with these requirements globally. Although it is our intent to comply with all such requirements and regulations, we cannot provide assurance that we are at all times in compliance. Environmental requirements are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time. Accordingly, we cannot assure that environmental requirements will not change or become more stringent over time or that our eventual environmental costs and liabilities will not be material.
Certain environmental laws assess liability on current or previous owners or operators of real property for the cost of removal or remediation of hazardous substances. At this time, we are involved in various stages of investigation and cleanup related to environmental remediation matters at certain of our present and former facilities. In addition, there may be soil or groundwater contamination at several of our properties resulting from historical, ongoing or nearby activities.
As of December 31, 2019, the undiscounted reserve for environmental investigation and remediation was approximately $12 million. We do not currently possess sufficient information to reasonably estimate the amounts of environmental liabilities to be recorded upon future completion of studies, litigation or settlements, and we cannot determine either the timing or the amount of the ultimate costs associated with environmental matters, which could be material to our consolidated and combined results of operations and operating cash flows in the periods recognized or paid. However, considering our past experience and existing reserves, we do not expect that environmental matters will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated and combined financial position.
Additionally, we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. Pursuant to the terms of our Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell (the “Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement”), we are responsible for paying to Honeywell such amounts, up to a cap equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate (as defined in the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement to be 1.16977 USD = 1 EUR) equivalent of $175 million (exclusive of any late payment fees) in respect of such liabilities arising in any given calendar year. See “Risk Factors—Risks Relating to Our Business—We are subject to risks associated with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, pursuant to which we are required to make substantial cash payments to Honeywell, measured in substantial part by reference to estimates by Honeywell of certain of its liabilities”. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
We are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. For additional information, see Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
14

 
Employees
As of December 31, 2019, we employed approximately 6,200 full-time employees and 2,400 temporary and contract workers globally. Approximately 25% of our full-time employees are represented by unions and works councils.
Seasonality
Our business is moderately seasonal. Our primary North American customers historically reduce production during the month of July and halt operations for approximately one week in December; our European customers generally reduce production during the months of July and August and for one week in December; and our Chinese customers often reduce production during the period surrounding the Chinese New Year. Shut-down periods in the rest of the world generally vary by country. In addition, automotive production is traditionally reduced in the months of July, August and September due to the launch of parts production for new vehicle models. Accordingly, our results reflect this seasonality. Our sales predictability in the short term might also be impacted by sudden changes in customer demand, driven by our OEM customers’ supply chain management.
We also experience seasonality in cash flow, as a relatively small portion of our full year cash flow is typically generated in the first quarter of the year and a relatively large portion in the last quarter. This seasonality in cash flow is mostly caused by timing of supplier payments for capital expenditures, changes in working capital balances related to the sales seasonality discussed above, and incentive payments.
Additional Information
 
Our Company was incorporated on March 14, 2018 as a Delaware corporation in connection with the Spin-Off from Honeywell, and we maintain our headquarters in Rolle, Switzerland.  For additional information regarding the Spin-Off, see “Basis of Presentation” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, as well as all amendments and other reports filed with or furnished to the SEC, are also available free of charge on our internet site at https://www.garrettmotion.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC.
 
 
 
15

 
Item 1A. Risk Factors
You should carefully consider all of the information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and each of the risks described below, which we believe are the principal risks we face. Any of the following risks could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations and the actual outcome of matters as to which forward-looking statements are made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other events that we do not currently anticipate or that we currently deem immaterial may also affect our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Risks Relating to Our Business
Industry and economic conditions may adversely affect the markets and operating conditions of our customers, which in turn can affect demand for our products and services and our results of operations.
We are dependent on the continued growth, viability and financial stability of our customers. A substantial portion of our customers are OEMs in the automotive industry. This industry is subject to rapid technological change often driven by regulatory changes, vigorous competition, short product life cycles and cyclical and reduced consumer demand patterns. In addition to general economic conditions, automotive sales and automotive vehicle production also depend on other factors, such as supplier stability, factory transitions, capacity constraints, the costs and availability of consumer credit, consumer confidence and consumer preferences. When our customers are adversely affected by these factors, we may be similarly affected to the extent that our customers reduce the volume of orders for our products. Economic declines and corresponding reductions in automotive sales and production by our customers, particularly with respect to light vehicles, have in the past had, and may in the future have, a significant adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Even if overall automotive sales and production remain stable, changes in regulations and consumer preferences may shift consumer demand away from the types of vehicles we prioritize or towards the types of vehicles where our products generate smaller profit margins. A decrease in consumer demand for the specific types of vehicles that have traditionally included our turbocharger products, such as a decrease in demand for diesel-fueled vehicles in favor of gasoline-fueled vehicles, or lower-than-expected consumer demand for specific types of vehicles where we anticipate providing significant components as part of our strategic growth plan, such as a decrease in demand for vehicles utilizing electric-hybrid and fuel cell powertrains in favor of full battery electric vehicles, could have a significant effect on our business. If we are unable to anticipate significant changes in consumer sentiment, or if consumer demand for certain vehicle types changes more than we expect, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Sales in our aftermarket operations are also directly related to consumer demand and spending for automotive aftermarket products, which may be affected by additional factors such as the average useful life of OEM parts and components, severity of regional weather conditions, highway and roadway infrastructure deterioration and the average number of miles vehicles are driven by owners. Improvements in technology and product quality are extending the longevity of vehicle component parts, which may result in delayed or reduced aftermarket sales. Our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected if we fail to respond in a timely and appropriate manner to changes in the demand for our aftermarket products.
Changes in legislation or government regulations or policies can have a significant impact on demand for our products and our results of operations.
The sales and margins of our business are directly impacted by government regulations, including safety, performance and product certification regulations, particularly with respect to emissions, fuel economy and energy efficiency standards for motor vehicles. Increased public awareness and concern regarding global climate change may result in more regional and/or federal requirements to reduce or mitigate the effects of greenhouse gas emissions. While such requirements can promote increased demand for our turbochargers and other products, several markets in which we operate are undertaking efforts to more strictly regulate or ban vehicles powered by certain older-generation diesel engines. If such efforts are pursued more broadly throughout the market than we have anticipated, such efforts may impact demand for our aftermarket products and consequently affect our results of operations.
16

 
In the long-term, several of the markets in which we operate are contemplating or undertaking multi-decade efforts to transition away from internal combustion engines in favor of hybrid or full-battery electric vehicles.
Although we expect a significant number of hybrids will be turbocharged, if we overestimate the turbo penetration rate in hybrids or if a transition to battery-electric vehicles is pursued more broadly throughout the market, or is implemented more rapidly than we have anticipated, the demand for our products could be impacted and our results of operations consequently could be affected.
Conversely, in the U.S., the current political administration has signaled that it may support efforts to slow or even reverse the adoption of environmental regulations. If requirements to reduce or mitigate the effects of greenhouse gas emissions are weakened or rolled back, whether in the U.S. or elsewhere in our markets, customer demand for our turbochargers could fall, negatively affecting our results of operations.
Our future growth is largely dependent upon our ability to develop new technologies and introduce new products with acceptable margins that achieve market acceptance or correctly anticipate regulatory changes.
The global automotive component supply industry is highly competitive. Our future growth rate depends upon a number of factors, including our ability to: (i) identify emerging technological trends in our target end-markets; (ii) develop and maintain competitive products; (iii) enhance our products by adding innovative features that differentiate our products from those of our competitors; (iv) develop, manufacture and bring compelling new products to market quickly and cost effectively; and (v) attract, develop and retain individuals with the requisite technical expertise and understanding of customers’ needs to develop new technologies and introduce new products.
We have identified a trend towards increased development and adoption by OEMs of hybrid-electric powertrains, fuel cell powertrains and associated electric boosting technologies in preference to pure battery electric cars, which continue to face range, charging time and sustainability issues. Our results of operations could be adversely affected if our estimates regarding adoption and penetration rates for hybrid-electric and fuel cell powertrains or for pure battery electric cars are incorrect.
Failure to protect our intellectual property or allegations that we have infringed the intellectual property of others could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We rely on a combination of patents, copyrights, trademarks, tradenames, trade secrets and other proprietary rights, as well as contractual arrangements, including licenses, to establish, maintain and protect our intellectual property rights. Effective intellectual property protection may not be available, or we may not be able to acquire or maintain appropriate registered or unregistered intellectual property, in every country in which we do business. Accordingly, our intellectual property rights may not be sufficient to permit us to take advantage of some business opportunities.
The protection of our intellectual property may require us to spend significant amounts of money. Further, the steps we take to protect our intellectual property may not adequately protect our rights or prevent others from infringing, violating or misappropriating our intellectual proprietary rights. Any impairment of our intellectual property rights, including due to changes in U.S. or foreign intellectual property laws or the absence of effective legal protections or enforcement measures, could adversely impact our businesses, financial condition and results of operations.
In addition, as we adopt new technology, we face an inherent risk of exposure to the claims of others that we have allegedly violated their intellectual property rights. Successful claims that we infringe on the intellectual property rights of others could require us to enter into royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms or cause us to incur substantial monetary liability. We may also be prohibited preliminarily or permanently from further use of the intellectual property in question or be required to change our business practices to stop the infringing use, which could limit our ability to compete effectively. In addition, our customer agreements may require us to indemnify the customer for infringement. The time and expense of defending against these claims, whether meritorious or not, may have a material and adverse impact on our profitability, can be time-consuming and costly and may divert management’s attention and resources away from our businesses. Furthermore, the publicity we may receive as a result of infringing intellectual property rights may damage our reputation and adversely impact our existing customer relationships and our ability to develop new business.
17

 
We may incur material losses and costs as a result of warranty claims, including product recalls, and product liability actions that may be brought against us.
Depending on the terms under which we supply products to an auto manufacturer, we may be required to guarantee or offer warranties for our products and to bear the costs of recalls, repair or replacement of such products pursuant to new vehicle warranties. There can be no assurance that we will have adequate reserves to cover such recall, repair and replacement costs. In the event that any of our products fails to perform as expected, we may face direct exposure to warranty and product liability claims or may be required to participate in a government or self-imposed recall involving such products. Our customers that are not end users, such as auto manufacturers, may face similar claims or be obliged to conduct recalls of their own, and in such circumstances, they may seek contribution from us. Our agreements with our customers typically do not contain limitation of liability clauses, so if any such claims or contribution requests exceed our available insurance, or if there is a product recall, there could be a material adverse impact on our results of operations. In addition, a recall claim could require us to review our entire product portfolio to assess whether similar issues are present in other product lines, which could result in significant disruption to our business and could have a further adverse impact on our results of operations. We cannot assure you that we will not experience any material warranty or product liability claim losses in the future or that we will not incur significant costs to defend such claims.
The operational constraints and financial distress of third parties could adversely impact our business and results of operations.
Our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows could be adversely affected if our third-party suppliers lack sufficient quality control or if there are significant changes in their financial or business condition. If our third-party manufacturers fail to deliver products, parts and components of sufficient quality on time and at reasonable prices, we could have difficulties fulfilling our orders on similar terms or at all, sales and profits could decline, and our commercial reputation could be damaged. See “—Raw material price fluctuations, the ability of key suppliers to meet quality and delivery requirements, or catastrophic events can increase the cost of our products and services, impact our ability to meet commitments to customers and cause us to incur significant liabilities.” If we fail to adequately assess the creditworthiness and operational reliability of existing or future suppliers, if there is any unanticipated deterioration in their creditworthiness and operational reliability, or if our suppliers do not perform or adhere to our existing or future contractual arrangements, any resulting increase in nonperformance by them, our inability to otherwise obtain the supplies or our inability to enforce the terms of the contract or seek other remedies could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Work stoppages, other disruptions, or the need to relocate any of our facilities could significantly disrupt our business.
Our geographic footprint emphasizes locating, engineering and manufacturing capabilities in close physical proximity to our customers, thereby enabling us to adopt technologies and products for the specific vehicle types sold in each geographic market. Because our facilities offer localized services in this manner, a work stoppage or other disruption at one or more of our R&D, engineering or manufacturing and assembly facilities in a given region could have material adverse effects on our business, especially insofar as it impacts our ability to serve customers in that region. For example, in February 2020, our manufacturing facility in Wuhan, China was shut down longer than expected during the Chinese New Year due to the novel coronavirus outbreak, causing us to delay certain shipments to our customers. Moreover, due to unforeseen circumstances or factors beyond our control, we may be forced to relocate our operations from one or more of our existing facilities to new facilities and may incur substantial costs, experience program delays and sacrifice proximity to customers and geographic markets as a result, potentially for an extended period of time.
The automotive industry relies heavily on “just-in-time” delivery of components during the assembly and manufacture of vehicles, and when we fail to make timely deliveries in accordance with our contractual obligations, we generally have to absorb our own costs for identifying and solving the “root cause” problem as well as expeditiously producing replacement components or products. We typically must also carry the costs associated with “catching up,” such as overtime and premium freight. Additionally, if we are the cause for a customer being forced to halt production, the customer may seek to recoup all of its losses and expenses from us. These losses and expenses could be significant, and may include consequential losses such as lost profits.
18

 
In addition, a significant disruption in the supply of a key component due to a work stoppage or other disruption at one of our suppliers or any other supplier could impact our ability to make timely deliveries to our customers and, accordingly, have a material adverse effect on our financial results. Where a customer halts production because of another supplier failing to deliver on time, or as a result of a work stoppage or other disruption, it is unlikely we will be fully compensated, if at all.
The novel coronavirus outbreak could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In December 2019, a strain of novel coronavirus surfaced in Wuhan, China. In January 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency and the U.S. Department of State instructed travelers to avoid all nonessential travel to China. We operate two facilities in China, including a manufacturing facility in Wuhan. The Chinese government has ordered our Wuhan facility to halt operations since January 23, 2020 and our Shanghai facility has operated at partial capacity due to labor constraints during the same period, which has disrupted our production schedules and will likely adversely affect our revenues. The resulting shortage of components produced by our Chinese facilities is expected to lead to lower shipments from the cancellation of new orders as well as lower volumes from existing orders. There can be no assurances as to when our Wuhan facility will re-open or when our Shanghai facility will resume operating at full capacity. Moreover, because of the current restrictions on travel in China, we may continue to have labor shortages even when our Wuhan facility re-opens, which may force us to continue to reduce operations. 
Certain of our suppliers and customers in China have been similarly affected and are experiencing closures and labor shortages. As a result of such closures, we have faced difficulty sourcing materials necessary to fulfill production requirements and meet scheduled shipments, including for our plants in Europe and North America, which we believe will negatively affect our revenues. Even if we are able to find alternate sources of supply for such materials, they may cost more, which could affect our profitability and financial condition. In addition, if our customers in China are not able to accept orders or if they delay or cancel such orders, our revenues will be negatively affected. 
At this point in time, there remains significant uncertainty relating to the potential effect of the novel coronavirus on our business. Infections may become more widespread, including to other countries where we have operations, and factory closures and travel restrictions may remain or worsen.
As a result of disruptions to our business as a result of the novel coronavirus, we expect that our revenues and results of operations will be negatively affected, which, among other things, could cause us to fail to comply with certain financial covenants in our Credit Agreement by and among us, Garrett LX I S.à r.l., Garrett LX II S.à r.l., Garrett LX III S.à r.l., Garrett Borrowing LLC, and Honeywell Technologies Sàrl, the lenders and issuing banks party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Credit Agreement”) and our Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement.
We may not realize sales represented by awarded business or effectively utilize our manufacturing capacity.
When we win a bid to offer products and services to an OEM customer, the customer typically does not commit to award us its business until a separate contract has been negotiated, generally with a term ranging from one year to the life of the model (usually three to seven years). Once business has been awarded, the OEM customer typically retains the ability to terminate the arrangement without penalty and does not commit to purchase a minimum volume of products while the contract is in effect.
In light of the foregoing, while we estimate awarded business using certain assumptions, including projected future sales volumes, the volume and timing of sales to our customers may vary due to: variation in demand for our customers’ products; our customers’ attempts to manage their inventory; design changes; changes in our customers’ manufacturing strategy; the success of customers’ goods and models; and acquisitions of or consolidations among customers. A significant decrease in demand for certain key models or a group of related models sold by any of our major customers, or the ability of a manufacturer to re-source and discontinue purchasing from us its requirements for a particular model or group of models, could have a material adverse effect on us. In particular, we may be unable to forecast the level of customer orders with sufficient certainty to allow us to optimize production schedules and maximize utilization of manufacturing capacity. Any excess capacity would cause us to incur increased fixed costs in our products relative to the net revenue we generate, which could have an adverse effect on our results of operations, particularly during economic downturns. Similarly, a significant failure or inability to adapt to increased production or desired inventory levels (including as a result of accelerated launch schedules for new automobile and truck platforms), 
19

 
comply with customer specifications and manufacturing requirements more generally or respond to other unexpected fluctuations, as well as any delays or other problems with existing or new products (including program launch difficulties) could result in financial penalties, increased costs, loss of sales, loss of customers or potential breaches of customer contracts, which could have an adverse effect on our profitability and results of operations.
If actual production orders from our customers are not consistent with the projections we use in calculating the amount of our awarded business, or if we are unable to improve utilization levels for manufacturing lines that consequently are underutilized and correctly manage capacity, the increased expense levels will have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations, and we could realize substantially less revenue over the life of these projects than the currently projected estimate.
We may not be able to successfully negotiate pricing terms with our customers, which may adversely affect our results of operations.
We negotiate sales prices annually with our automotive customers. Our customer supply agreements generally require step-downs in component pricing over the period of production. In addition, our customers often reserve the right to terminate their supply contracts at any time, which enhances their ability to obtain price reductions. OEMs have also exercised significant influence over their suppliers, including us, because the automotive component supply industry is highly competitive and serves a limited number of customers. Based on these factors, our status as a Tier I supplier (one that supplies vehicle components directly to manufacturers) and the fact that our customers’ product programs typically last a number of years and are anticipated to encompass large volumes, our customers are able to negotiate favorable pricing, and any cost-cutting initiatives that our customers adopt generally will result in increased downward pressure on our pricing. Any resulting impacts to our sales levels and margins, or the failure of our technologies or products to gain market acceptance due to more attractive offerings by our competitors, could over time significantly reduce our revenues and adversely affect our competitive standing and prospects. In particular, large commercial settlements with our customers may adversely affect our results of operations.
We are subject to the economic, political, regulatory, foreign exchange and other risks of international operations.
We have created a geographic footprint that emphasizes locating R&D, engineering and manufacturing capabilities in close physical proximity to our customers. Our international geographic footprint subjects us to many risks, including: exchange control regulations; wage and price controls; antitrust and environmental regulations; employment regulations; foreign investment laws; monetary and fiscal policies and protectionist measures that may prohibit acquisitions or joint ventures, establish local content requirements, or impact trade volumes; import, export and other trade restrictions (such as embargoes); violations by our employees of anti-corruption laws; changes in regulations regarding transactions with state-owned enterprises; nationalization of private enterprises; natural and man-made disasters, hazards and losses; global health risks and pandemics; backlash from foreign labor organizations related to our restructuring actions; violence, civil and labor unrest; acts of terrorism; and our ability to hire and maintain qualified staff and maintain the safety of our employees in these regions. Additionally, certain of the markets in which we operate have adopted increasingly strict data privacy and data protection requirements or may require local storage and processing of data or similar requirements. The European Commission has approved a data protection regulation, known as the General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”), that came into force in May 2018. The GDPR includes operational requirements for companies that receive or process personal data of residents of the European Union and includes significant penalties for non-compliance. The GDPR and similar data protection measures may increase the cost and complexity of our ability to deliver our services.
Following the U.K.’s withdrawal from the European Union on January 31, 2020, the U.K. entered into a transition period during which it will continue its ongoing and complex negotiations with the European Union relating to the future trading relationship between the U.K. and European Union. Significant political and economic uncertainty remains about whether the terms of the relationship will differ materially from the terms before withdrawal, as well as about the possibility that a so-called “no deal” separation could occur if negotiations are not completed by the end of the transition period. Our manufacturing operations in Cheadle and the businesses of our customers and suppliers could be negatively impacted if tariffs or other restrictions are imposed on the free flow of goods to and from the U.K. Trade tensions between the United States and China, and other countries have been escalating in recent years. U.S. tariff impositions against Chinese exports have generally been followed by retaliatory Chinese tariffs on U.S. exports to China. We may not be able to mitigate the impacts of any future tariffs, and our business, results of operations and financial position would be materially adversely affected by such tariffs. Further changes in U.S. trade policies, tariffs, taxes, export restrictions or other trade barriers, or restrictions on raw materials or components may limit our ability to produce products, increase our manufacturing costs, decrease our profit margins, reduce the competitiveness of our products, or inhibit our ability to sell products or purchase raw materials or components, which would have a material 
20

 
adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. These and other instabilities and uncertainties arising from the global geopolitical environment, along with the cost of compliance with increasingly complex and often conflicting regulations worldwide, can impair our flexibility in modifying product, marketing, pricing or other strategies for growing our businesses, as well as our ability to improve productivity and maintain acceptable operating margins.
As a result of our global presence, a significant portion of our revenues are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar whereas a significant amount of our payment obligations are denominated in U.S. dollars, which exposes us to foreign exchange risk. We monitor and seek to reduce such risk through hedging activities; however, foreign exchange hedging activities bear a financial cost and may not always be available to us or be successful in eliminating such volatility.
Finally, we generate significant amounts of cash that is invested with financial and non-financial counterparties. While we employ comprehensive controls regarding global cash management to guard against cash or investment loss and to ensure our ability to fund our operations and commitments, a material disruption to the counterparties with whom we transact business could expose us to financial loss.
We have invested substantial resources in specific foreign markets where we expect growth and we may be unable to timely alter our strategies should such expectations not be realized.
We have identified certain countries, such as China and India, as key high-growth geographic markets. We believe these markets are likely to experience substantial long-term growth, and accordingly have made and expect to continue to make substantial investments in numerous manufacturing operations, technical centers, R&D activities and other infrastructure to support anticipated growth in these areas. If market demand for evolving vehicle technologies in these regions does not grow as quickly as we anticipate, or if we are unable to deepen existing and develop additional customer relationships in these regions, we may fail to realize expected rates of return, or even incur losses, on our existing investments and may be unable to timely redeploy the invested capital to take advantage of other markets or product categories, potentially resulting in lost market share to our competitors. In particular, our ability to remain competitive and continue to grow in these regions depends in part on the absence of competing state-sponsored domestic businesses. If a state-sponsored operation entered a local market as a competitor, it might have access to significant social and financial capital that would enable it to overcome the ordinary barriers to entry in the turbocharger industry and acquire potentially significant market share at our expense.
We could be adversely affected by our leading market position in certain markets.
We believe that we are a market leader in the turbocharger industry in many of the markets in which we operate. Although we believe we have acted properly in the markets in which we have significant market share, we could face allegations of abuse of our market position or of collusion with other market participants, which could result in negative publicity and adverse regulatory action by the relevant authorities, including the imposition of monetary fines, all of which could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
A downgrade in our credit ratings, or a deterioration in industry, economic or financial conditions may restrict our ability to access the capital markets on favorable terms. 
We may require additional capital in the future to finance our growth and development, upgrade and improve our manufacturing capabilities, implement further marketing and sales activities, fund ongoing R&D activities, satisfy regulatory and environmental compliance obligations, satisfy indemnity obligations to Honeywell, and meet general working capital needs. Our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including acceptance of and demand for our products, the extent to which we invest in new technology and R&D projects and the status and timing of these developments. If our access to capital were to become constrained significantly, or if costs of capital increased significantly, due to lowered credit ratings, prevailing industry conditions, the solvency of our customers, a material decline in demand for or our products, the volatility of the capital markets or other factors, our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected. These conditions may adversely affect our ability to obtain targeted credit ratings.
Moreover, we have historically relied on Honeywell for assistance in satisfying our capital requirements. As a result of the Spin-Off, we are no longer able to rely on the earnings, assets or cash flow of Honeywell, and Honeywell will not provide funds to finance our capital requirements. We are also responsible for obtaining and maintaining sufficient working capital and other funds to satisfy our cash requirements independent of Honeywell, and debt or equity financing may not be available to us on terms we find acceptable, if at all. Incurring additional debt may significantly increase our interest expense and financial leverage, and our level of indebtedness could restrict our ability to fund future development and acquisition activities. Also, regardless of the terms of our debt or equity financing, our agreements and obligations under the Tax Matters Agreement that address compliance with Section 355 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as 
21

 
amended (the “Code”) may limit our ability to issue stock. We may need additional capital resources in the future in order to meet our projected operating needs, capital expenditures and other cash requirements, and if we are unable to obtain sufficient resources for our operating needs, capital expenditures and other cash requirements for any reason, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected. See “Risks Relating to the Spin-Off — We may be unable to make, on a timely or cost-effective basis, the changes necessary to operate effectively as an independent, publicly traded company, and we may experience increased costs due to our separation from Honeywell.”
We are subject to risks associated with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, pursuant to which we are required to make substantial cash payments to Honeywell, measured in substantial part by reference to estimates by Honeywell of certain of its liabilities.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into an Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, pursuant to which we have an obligation to make cash payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to Honeywell’s legacy Bendix friction materials (“Bendix”) business in the United States as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of our business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities.
The amount payable by the Company in respect of such liabilities arising in any given year will be payable in Euros, subject to a cap (denominated in Euros) equal to $175 million, calculated by reference to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate. The cap is exclusive of any late payment fees up to 5% per annum.
For example, if in any given year, Honeywell’s annual liabilities including associated legal costs that are within the scope of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement totaled $200 million, and if Honeywell’s associated insurance receipts and other specified recoveries totaled $20 million (resulting in a net amount of $180 million), then our payment obligation in respect of that year would be based upon 90% of the net amount ($162 million), payable in Euros, calculated by reference to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate (1.16977 USD = 1 EUR) (totaling approximately €138.5 million). However, if in any given year, such liabilities including associated legal costs totaled $250 million, and the associated insurance receipts and other specified recoveries totaled $30 million, then our payment obligation in respect of that year would be capped at approximately €149.6 million (which equals $175 million divided by the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate of 1.16977 USD = 1 EUR) even though 90% of the net amount is higher at $198 million (€169.3 million calculated by reference to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate of 1.16977 USD = 1 EUR).
The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
In 2019 and in the fourth quarter of 2018, the Company paid Honeywell $153 million and $41 million, respectively, in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. Garrett has made all payments under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement under protest, as described below. Prior to the Spin-Off, Honeywell’s asbestos-related Bendix liability payments for 2017, including any legal fees, was $223 million, and Honeywell’s associated insurance receipts for 2017 was $20 million.
In the event that Honeywell enters into a global settlement of all or substantially all of the asbestos-related Bendix claims in the United States, the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that we are obligated to pay 90% of the amount paid or payable by Honeywell in connection with such global settlement payment, less 90% of insurance receipts relating to such liabilities, and in such event, we are required to pay an amount equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate equivalent of $175 million per year until the amount payable by us in respect of such global settlement payment is less than an amount equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate equivalent of $175 million. During that time, the annual payment by us to Honeywell of an amount equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate equivalent of $175 million will be first allocated towards asbestos-related liabilities arising outside of the scope of the global settlement and environmental-related liabilities and then towards the global settlement payment. Payment amounts will be deferred to the extent that the payment thereof would cause a specified event of default under certain indebtedness, including our principal credit agreement or cause us to not be 
22

 
compliant with certain financial covenants in certain indebtedness, including our principal credit agreement on a pro forma basis, including the maximum total leverage ratio (ratio of debt to consolidated EBITDA as defined by such credit agreement, which excludes any amounts owed to Honeywell under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement), and the minimum interest coverage ratio. In each calendar quarter, our ability to pay dividends and repurchase capital stock in such calendar quarter will be restricted until any amounts payable under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement in such quarter (including any deferred payment amounts) are paid to Honeywell and we will be required to use available restricted payment capacity under our debt agreements to make payments in respect of any such deferred amounts. Payment of deferred amounts and certain other amounts (which are not expected to be material) could cause the amount we are required to pay under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement in any given year to exceed an amount equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate equivalent of $175 million per year (exclusive of any late payment fees up to 5% per annum). All amounts payable under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement will be guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries that act as guarantors under our principal credit agreement, subject to certain exceptions. Under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, we are also subject to certain of the affirmative and negative covenants to which we are subject under our Credit Agreement or to which we may become subject in the future under new principal credit agreements, and these covenants purport to continue to apply in certain circumstances notwithstanding a replacement of our Credit Agreement or a waiver of the corresponding covenants by our lenders. Further, pursuant to the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, our ability to (i) amend or replace the Credit Agreement, (ii) enter into another credit agreement and make amendments or waivers thereto, or (iii) enter into or amend or waive any provisions under other agreements, in each case, in a manner that would adversely affect the rights of Honeywell under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, will be subject to Honeywell’s prior written consent. These covenants and consent rights in favor of Honeywell in the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement may significantly limit our ability to engage in many types of significant transactions on favorable terms (or at all), including, but not limited to, equity and debt financings, liability management transactions, refinancing transactions, mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures and other strategic transactions. 
This agreement may have material adverse effects on our liquidity and cash flows and on our results of operations, regardless of whether we experience a decline in net sales. The agreement may also require us to accrue significant long-term liabilities on our consolidated and combined balance sheet, the amounts of which will be dependent on factors outside of our control, including Honeywell’s responsibility to manage and determine the outcomes of claims underlying the liabilities. As of December 31, 2019, and 2018, we have accrued $1,090 and $1,244 million, respectively of liability in connection with Bendix-related asbestos as well as environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, representing the estimated liability for pending claims as well as future claims expected to be asserted. The liabilities related to the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement may have a significant negative impact on the calculation of key financial ratios and other metrics that are important to investors, rating agencies and securities analysts in evaluating our creditworthiness and the value of our securities. Accordingly, our access to capital to fund our operations may be materially adversely affected and the value of your investment in our company may decline. Moreover, the payments that we are required to make to Honeywell pursuant to the terms of that agreement will not be deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Although we have access to certain information regarding these liabilities as we may reasonably request for certain purposes, as well as the ability to participate in periodic standing meetings with Honeywell’s special counsel responsible for management of the underlying claims, the payment obligations under this agreement relate to legal proceedings that we will not control, and we accordingly do not expect to be able to make definitive decisions regarding settlements or other outcomes that could influence our potential related exposure.
The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement also includes other obligations that may impose significant operating and financial restrictions on us and our subsidiaries and limit our ability to engage in actions that may be in our long-term best interests.
In December 2019, we commenced a lawsuit against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duties, aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duties, corporate waste, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unjust enrichment. Our lawsuit seeks to establish that the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement is unenforceable in whole or in part and that Honeywell has breached its obligations under this agreement by failing to provide us with information as to the underlying claims to which it is entitled. There can be no assurance as to the time and resources that will be required to pursue these claims or the ultimate outcome of the lawsuit. The costs incurred in litigation may be substantial and result in the diversion of management’s attention and resources.
23

 
Raw material price fluctuations, the ability of key suppliers to meet quality and delivery requirements, or catastrophic events can increase the cost of our products and services, impact our ability to meet commitments to customers and cause us to incur significant liabilities.
The cost and availability of raw materials (including, but not limited to, grey iron, aluminum, stainless steel and a nickel, iron and chromium-based alloy) is a key element in the cost of our products. Our inability to offset material price inflation through increased prices to customers, formula or long-term fixed price contracts with suppliers, productivity actions or through commodity hedges could adversely affect our results of operations.
We obtain components and other products and services from numerous suppliers and other vendors throughout the world. Many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a single- or sole-source basis. Although we believe that sources of supply for raw materials and components are generally adequate, it is difficult to predict what effects shortages or price increases may have in the future. Short- or long-term capacity constraints or financial distress at any point in our supply chain could disrupt our operations and adversely affect our financial performance, particularly when the affected suppliers and vendors are the sole sources of products that we require or that have unique capabilities, or when our customers have directed us to use those specific suppliers and vendors. Our ability to manage inventory and meet delivery requirements may be constrained by our suppliers’ inability to scale production and adjust delivery of long-lead time products during times of volatile demand. Our inability to fill our supply needs would jeopardize our ability to fulfill obligations under commercial contracts, and could result in reduced sales and profits, contract penalties or terminations, and damage to customer relationships.
Failure to increase productivity through sustainable operational improvements, as well as an inability to successfully execute repositioning projects or to effectively manage our workforce, may reduce our profitability or adversely impact our business.
Our profitability and margin growth are dependent upon our ability to drive sustainable improvements. In addition, we seek productivity and cost savings benefits through repositioning actions and projects, such as consolidation of manufacturing facilities, transitions to cost-competitive regions, workforce reductions, asset impairments, product line rationalizations and other cost-saving initiatives. Risks associated with these actions include delays in execution of the planned initiatives, additional unexpected costs, realization of fewer than estimated productivity improvements and adverse effects on employee morale. We may not realize the full operational or financial benefits we expect, the recognition of these benefits may be delayed and these actions may potentially disrupt our operations. In addition, organizational changes, attrition, labor relations difficulties, or workforce stoppage could have a material adverse effect on our business, reputation, financial position and results of operations.
Our operations and the prior operations of predecessor companies expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.
We are subject to potentially material liabilities related to the investigation and cleanup of environmental hazards and to claims of personal injuries or property damages that may arise from hazardous substance releases and exposures. We are also subject to potentially material liabilities related to the compliance of our operations with the requirements of various federal, state, local and foreign governments that regulate the discharge of materials into the environment and the generation, handling, storage, treatment and disposal of and exposure to hazardous substances. If we are found to be in violation of these laws and regulations, we may be subject to substantial fines and criminal sanctions and be required to install costly equipment or make operational changes to achieve compliance with such laws and regulations. In addition, changes in laws, regulations or government enforcement of policies concerning the environment, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or new information related to individual contaminated sites, the establishment of stricter state or federal toxicity standards with respect to certain contaminants, or the imposition of new clean-up requirements or remedial techniques, could require us to incur additional currently unanticipated costs in the future that would have a negative effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
24

 
We cannot predict with certainty the outcome of litigation matters, government proceedings and other contingencies and uncertainties.
In the ordinary course of business, we are or may be party to a number of lawsuits, investigations and disputes (some of which involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of our current and historical business, including matters relating to our Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, commercial transactions, product liability (including legacy asbestos claims involving the friction materials legacy business), prior acquisitions and divestitures, employment, employee benefits plans, intellectual property, antitrust, import and export, and environmental, health and safety matters. For example, we are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. We cannot predict with certainty the outcome of our lawsuit against Honeywell, or any other legal proceedings or contingencies. The costs incurred in litigation can be substantial and result in the diversion of management’s attention and resources. 
We may also make certain commitments, including representations, warranties and indemnities relating to current and past operations, including those related to divested businesses, and issue guarantees of third-party obligations. Our potential liabilities are subject to change over time due to new developments, changes in settlement strategy or the impact of evidentiary requirements, and we may become subject to or be required to pay damage awards or settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. If we were required to make payments, such payments could be significant and could exceed the amounts we have accrued with respect thereto, adversely affecting our business, financial condition and results of operations. While we maintain insurance for certain risks, the amount of our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover the total amount of all insured claims and liabilities. The incurrence of significant liabilities for which there is no or insufficient insurance coverage could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition.
We depend on the recruitment and retention of qualified personnel, and our failure to attract and retain such personnel could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Due to the complex nature of our business, our future performance is highly dependent upon the continued services of our key engineering personnel, scientists and executive officers, the development of additional management personnel and the hiring of new qualified engineering, manufacturing, marketing, sales and management personnel for our operations. Competition for qualified personnel in our industry is intense, and we may not be successful in attracting or retaining qualified personnel. The loss of key employees, our inability to attract new qualified employees or adequately train employees, or the delay in hiring key personnel, could negatively affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
System or service failures, including as a result of cyber or other security incidents, could disrupt business operations, result in the loss of critical and confidential information, and adversely impact our reputation and results of operations.
We deploy and maintain IT and engineering systems. Our systems involve sensitive information and may be conducted in hazardous environments. As a result, we are subject to systems or service failures, not only resulting from our failures or the failures of third-party service providers, natural disasters, power shortages or terrorist attacks, but also from exposure to cyber or other security threats. Global cybersecurity threats and incidents can range from uncoordinated individual attempts to gain unauthorized access to IT systems to sophisticated and targeted measures known as advanced persistent threats, directed at the Company, our products, our customers and/or our third-party service providers, including cloud providers. There has been an increase in the frequency and sophistication of cyber and other security threats we face, and our customers are increasingly requiring cyber and other security protections and mandating cyber and other security standards in our products.
Cyber and other security incidents, depending on their nature and scope, could potentially result in the misappropriation, destruction, corruption or unavailability of critical data and confidential or proprietary information (our own or that of third parties) and the disruption of business operations. Moreover, employee error or malfeasance, faulty password management or other intentional or inadvertent non-compliance with our security protocols may result in a breach of our information systems. Cyber and other security incidents aimed at the software embedded in our products could lead to third-party claims that our product failures have caused a similar range of damages to our customers, and this risk is enhanced by the increasingly connected nature of our products.
25

 
The potential consequences of a material cyber or other security incident include financial loss, reputational damage, litigation with third parties, theft of intellectual property, fines levied by the United States Federal Trade Commission, diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, and increased cyber and other security protection and remediation costs due to the increasing sophistication and proliferation of threats, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations. In addition to any costs resulting from contract performance or required corrective action, these incidents could generate increased costs or loss of revenue if our customers choose to postpone or cancel previously scheduled orders or decide not to renew any of our existing contracts.
The costs related to cyber or other security incidents may not be fully insured or indemnified by other means. The successful assertion of a large claim against us with respect to a cyber or other security incident could seriously harm our business. Even if not successful, these claims could result in significant legal and other costs, may be a distraction to our management and harm our customer relationships, as well as our reputation.
Our U.S. and non-U.S. tax liabilities are dependent, in part, upon the distribution of income among various jurisdictions in which we operate.
Our future results of operations could be adversely affected by changes in the effective tax rate as a result of a change in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in tax laws, regulations and judicial rulings (or changes in the interpretation thereof), changes in generally accepted accounting principles, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, the results of audits and examinations of previously filed tax returns and continuing assessments of our tax exposures and various other governmental enforcement initiatives. Our tax expense includes estimates of tax reserves and reflects other estimates and assumptions, including assessments of our future earnings which could impact the valuation of our deferred tax assets. Changes in tax laws or regulations, including multi-jurisdictional changes enacted in response to the guidelines provided by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development to address base erosion and profit shifting, will increase tax uncertainty and may adversely impact our provision for income taxes.
Because we have officers and directors who live outside of the United States, you may have no effective recourse against them for misconduct and may not be able to receive compensation for damages to the value of your investment caused by wrongful actions by our directors and officers.
We have officers and directors who live outside of the United States. As a result, it may be difficult for investors to enforce within the U.S. any judgments obtained against those officers and directors or obtain judgments against them outside of the U.S. that are based on the civil liability provisions of the federal or state securities laws of the U.S. Investors may not be able to receive compensation for damages to the value of their investment caused by wrongful actions by our directors and officers.
Our emerging opportunities in technology, products and services depend in part on intellectual property and technology licensed from third parties.
A number of our emerging opportunities in technology, products and services rely on key technologies developed or licensed from third parties. While none of our current product offerings are covered by third-party licenses, many of our emerging technology offerings that we are developing use software components or other intellectual property licensed from third parties, including both through proprietary and open source licenses. Should such emerging products become a significant part of our product offerings, our reliance on third-party licenses may present various risks to our business. These third-party software components may become obsolete, defective or incompatible with future versions of our emerging technology offerings, our relationship with these third parties may deteriorate, or our agreements with these third parties may expire or be terminated. We may face legal or business disputes with licensors that may threaten or lead to the disruption of inbound licensing relationships. In order to remain in compliance with the terms of our licenses, we must carefully monitor and manage our use of third-party components, including both proprietary and open source license terms that may require the licensing or public disclosure of our intellectual property without compensation or on undesirable terms. Additionally, some of these licenses may not be available for use in the future on terms that may be acceptable or that allow our emerging product offerings to remain competitive. Our inability to obtain licenses or rights on favorable terms could have a material effect on our emerging technology offerings. Moreover, it is possible that as a consequence of a future merger or acquisition we may be involved in, third parties may obtain licenses to some of our intellectual property rights or our business may be subject to certain 
26

 
restrictions that were not in place prior to such transaction. Because the availability and cost from third parties depends upon the willingness of third parties to deal with us on the terms we request, there is a risk that third parties who license our competitors will either refuse to license us at all, or refuse to license us on terms equally favorable to those granted to our competitors. Consequently, we may lose a competitive advantage with respect to these intellectual property rights or we may be required to enter into costly arrangements in order to obtain these rights.
Risks Relating to the Spin-Off and our Separation from Honeywell
If the Spin-Off were determined not to qualify as tax-free for U.S. federal income tax purposes, we could have an indemnification obligation to Honeywell, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
If, as a result of any of our representations being untrue or our covenants being breached, the Spin-Off were determined not to qualify for non-recognition of gain or loss under Section 355 and related provisions of the Code, we could be required to indemnify Honeywell for the resulting taxes and related expenses. Further, if any pre-spin restructuring activities that were initiated by Honeywell were determined to be taxable and benefit the Company, we could be required to indemnify Honeywell. Those amounts could be material. Any such indemnification obligation could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In addition, if we or our stockholders were to engage in transactions that resulted in a 50% or greater change by vote or value in the ownership of our stock during the four-year period beginning on the date that begins two years before the date of the Distribution, the Spin-Off would generally be taxable to Honeywell, but not to stockholders, under Section 355(e), unless it were established that such transactions and the Spin-Off were not part of a plan or series of related transactions. If the Spin-Off were taxable to Honeywell due to such a 50% or greater change in ownership of our stock, Honeywell would recognize gain equal to the excess of the fair market value on the Distribution Date of our common stock distributed to Honeywell stockholders over Honeywell’s tax basis in our common stock, and we generally would be required to indemnify Honeywell for the tax on such gain and related expenses. Those amounts would be material. Any such indemnification obligation could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.  
We are subject to risks relating to our Tax Matters Agreement with Honeywell.
We have agreed in the Tax Matters Agreement to covenants and indemnification obligations that address compliance with Section 355 of the Code and are intended to preserve the tax-free nature of the Spin-Off. These covenants include certain restrictions on our activity for a period of two years following the Spin-Off, unless Honeywell gives its consent for us to take a restricted action, which Honeywell is permitted to grant or withhold at its sole discretion. These covenants and indemnification obligations may limit our ability to pursue strategic transactions or engage in new businesses or other transactions that may maximize the value of our business and might discourage or delay a strategic transaction that our stockholders may consider favorable. 
In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Tax Matters Agreement, we are required to make payments to a subsidiary of Honeywell in an amount payable in Euros (calculated by reference to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate) representing the net tax liability of Honeywell under the mandatory transition tax attributable to us, as determined by Honeywell. Following the Spin-Off, Honeywell determined the portion of its net tax liability attributable to us is $240 million. The remaining amount is payable in installments through 2025 and may be adjusted at Honeywell’s discretion in the event of an audit adjustment or otherwise. In connection with the Tax Matters Agreement, we paid Honeywell, under protest, the Euro-equivalent of $18 million and $19 million during 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively. Furthermore, Honeywell will control any subsequent tax audits or legal proceedings with respect to the mandatory transition tax, and accordingly we do not expect to be able to make definitive decisions regarding settlements or other outcomes that could influence our potential related
27

 
We may be unable to achieve some or all of the benefits that we expect to achieve from the Spin-Off.
We believe that, as an independent, publicly traded company, we will be able to, among other things, design and implement corporate strategies and policies that are better targeted to our business’s areas of strength and differentiation, better focus our financial and operational resources on those specific strategies, create effective incentives for our management and employees that are more closely tied to our business performance, provide investors more flexibility and enable us to achieve alignment with a more natural stockholder base and implement and maintain a capital structure designed to meet our specific needs. We may be unable to achieve some or all of the benefits that we expect to achieve as an independent company in the time we expect, if at all, for a variety of reasons, including: (i) operating as a stand-alone public company requires significant amounts of our management’s time and effort, which has diverted, and may continue to divert, management’s attention from operating and growing our business; (ii) we may be more susceptible to market fluctuations and other adverse events than if we were still a part of Honeywell; and (iii) our businesses is less diversified than Honeywell’s businesses prior to the separation. If we fail to achieve some or all of the benefits that we expect to achieve as an independent company, or do not achieve them in the time we expect, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
As we build our information technology infrastructure and transition our data to our own systems, we could incur substantial additional costs and experience temporary business interruptions, and our accounting and other management systems and resources may not be adequately prepared to meet the financial reporting and other requirements to which we are subject.
We are in the process of installing and implementing information technology infrastructure to support certain of our business functions, including accounting and reporting, manufacturing process control, customer service, inventory control and distribution. We may incur substantially higher costs than currently anticipated as we transition from the existing transactional and operational systems and data centers we previously used as part of Honeywell. If we are unable to transition effectively, we may incur temporary interruptions in business operations. Any delay in implementing, or operational interruptions suffered while implementing, our new information technology infrastructure could disrupt our business and have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
In addition, if we are unable to replicate or transition certain systems, our ability to comply with regulatory requirements could be impaired. As a result of the Spin-Off, we are directly subject to reporting and other obligations under the Exchange Act. For example, we are required to comply with Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (the “Sarbanes Oxley Act”), which requires annual management assessments of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and a report by our independent registered public accounting firm addressing these assessments. These reporting and other obligations have placed, and may continue to place, significant demands on management, administrative and operational resources, including accounting systems and resources.
The Exchange Act requires that we file annual, quarterly and current reports with respect to our business and financial condition. Under the Sarbanes Oxley Act, we are required to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting. To comply with these requirements, we have upgraded our systems, implemented additional financial and management controls, reporting systems and procedures and hired additional accounting and finance staff. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional annual expenses for the purpose of addressing these, and other public company reporting, requirements. If we are unable to maintain effective financial and management controls, reporting systems, information technology systems and procedures, our ability to comply with financial reporting requirements and other rules that apply to reporting companies under the Exchange Act could be impaired. Any failure to achieve and maintain effective internal controls could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. See “—Risks Relating to Our Common Stock and the Securities Market—If we fail to maintain proper and effective internal controls, our ability to produce accurate and timely financial statements could be impaired and investors’ views of us could be harmed.”
28

 
We have a limited operating history as an independent, publicly traded company, and our historical consolidated and combined financial information prior to the Spin-Off is not necessarily representative of the results we would have achieved as an independent, publicly traded company and may not be a reliable indicator of our future results.
We derived much of the financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K from Honeywell’s consolidated financial statements, and this information does not necessarily reflect the results of operations and financial position we would have achieved as an independent, publicly traded company during the periods presented, or those that we will achieve in the future. This is primarily because of the following factors:




 

•

Prior to the Spin-Off, we operated as part of Honeywell’s broader corporate organization, and Honeywell performed various corporate functions for us. Our historical consolidated and combined financial information prior to the Spin-Off reflects allocations of corporate expenses from Honeywell for these and similar functions. These allocations may not reflect the costs we incur for similar services in the future as an independent publicly traded company.




 

•

We have entered into transactions with Honeywell that did not exist prior to the Spin-Off, such as Honeywell’s provision of transition and other services, and undertaken indemnification obligations, which have caused, and will continue to cause us to incur new costs. 




 

•

Our historical consolidated and combined financial information prior to the Spin-Off does not reflect changes that we  have experienced as a result of our separation from Honeywell, and expect to continue to experience in the future, including changes in the financing, cash management, operations, cost structure and personnel needs of our business. As part of Honeywell, we enjoyed certain benefits from Honeywell’s operating diversity, size, purchasing power, borrowing leverage and available capital for investments, and we have lost these benefits due to the Spin-Off. As an independent entity, we may be unable to purchase goods, services and technologies, such as insurance and health care benefits and computer software licenses, or access capital markets, on terms as favorable to us as those we obtained as part of Honeywell prior to the Spin-Off, and our results of operations may be adversely affected. In addition, our historical consolidated and combined financial data prior to the Spin-Off do not include an allocation of interest expense comparable to the interest expense we incurred as a result of the Spin-Off and related reorganization transactions, including interest expense in connection with our incurrence of indebtedness.
Due to our separation from Honeywell, we also face additional costs and demands on management’s time associated with being an independent, publicly traded company, including costs and demands related to corporate governance, investor and public relations and public reporting. While we were profitable as part of Honeywell, we cannot assure you that our profits will continue at a similar level now that we are an independent, publicly traded company. 
Our indebtedness could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we incurred substantial indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $1,660 million, of which $1,628 million of the net proceeds were transferred to Honeywell substantially concurrently with the consummation of the Spin-Off.
We historically relied upon Honeywell to fund our working capital requirements and other cash requirements. We are now responsible for servicing our own debt and obtaining and maintaining sufficient working capital and other funds to satisfy our cash requirements. Due to our separation from Honeywell, our access to and cost of debt financing will be different from the historical access to and cost of debt financing under Honeywell. Differences in access to and cost of debt financing may result in differences in the interest rate charged to us on financings, as well as the amount of indebtedness, types of financing structures and debt markets that may be available to us.
Our ability to make payments on and to refinance our indebtedness, including the debt incurred in connection with the Spin-Off, as well as any future debt that we may incur, will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future from operations, financings or asset sales. Our ability to generate cash is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control.
29

 
The terms of the indebtedness we incurred in connection with the Spin-Off restricts our current and future operations, particularly our ability to incur debt that we may need to fund initiatives in response to changes in our business, the industries in which we operate, the economy and governmental regulations.
The terms of our Credit Agreement include a number of restrictive covenants that impose significant operating and financial restrictions on us and our subsidiaries and limit our ability to engage in actions that may be in our long-term best interests. These may restrict our and our subsidiaries’ ability to take some or all of the following actions:
 




 

•

incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or sell disqualified or preferred stock;




 

•

pay dividends on, make distributions in respect of, repurchase or redeem capital stock;




 

•

make investments or acquisitions;




 

•

sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of certain assets;




 

•

create liens;




 

•

enter into sale/leaseback transactions;




 

•

enter into agreements restricting the ability to pay dividends or make other intercompany transfers;




 

•

consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our or our subsidiaries’ assets;




 

•

enter into transactions with affiliates;




 

•

prepay, repurchase or redeem certain kinds of indebtedness;




 

•

issue or sell stock of our subsidiaries; and/or




 

•

significantly change the nature of our business.
Moreover, as a result of all of these restrictions, we may be limited in how we conduct our business and pursue our strategy, unable to  raise additional debt financing to operate during general economic or business downturns, or unable to compete effectively or to take advantage of new business opportunities. Furthermore, the lenders of this indebtedness have required that we pledge our assets as security for our repayment obligations and that we abide by certain financial or operational covenants. Our ability to comply with such covenants and restrictions may be affected by events beyond our control, including prevailing economic, political, social, financial and industry conditions, such as the novel coronavirus, which has negatively affected our operations in China and will likely have an adverse impact on our revenues, financial condition and results of operations. If market or other economic conditions deteriorate or if the situation in China worsens, our ability to comply with these covenants may be impaired, and we may not be able to refinance our indebtedness on favorable terms or at all. A breach of any of these covenants, if applicable, could result in an event of default under the terms of our Credit Agreement. If an event of default occurred, the lenders under our Credit Agreement would have the right to accelerate the repayment of such debt, and the event of default or acceleration could result in the acceleration of the repayment of any other debt to which a cross-default or cross-acceleration provision applies. We might not have, or be able to obtain, sufficient funds to make these accelerated payments, and lenders could then proceed against any collateral. Any subsequent replacement of the agreements governing such indebtedness, or any new indebtedness could have similar or greater restrictions. The occurrence and ramifications of an event of default could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. 
Uncertainty relating to the LIBOR calculation process and potential phasing out of LIBOR after 2021 may adversely affect the market value of our current or future debt obligations. 
 
The London Inter-bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”)  is the basic rate of interest used in lending between banks on the London interbank market and is widely used as a reference for setting the interest rates on loans globally. We generally use LIBOR as a reference rate to calculate interest rates (mainly for USD borrowings) under our Credit Agreement. In 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. It is unclear if LIBOR will cease to exist at that time or if new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established such that it continues to exist after 2021. The U.S. Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, is considering replacing U.S. dollar LIBOR with a new index, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), calculated using short-term repurchase agreements backed by Treasury securities. Whether or not SOFR, or 
30

 
another alternative reference rate, attains market traction as a LIBOR replacement tool remains in question. If LIBOR ceases to exist, we will need to agree upon a replacement index with the banks under our Credit Agreement, and certain of the interest rates under our Credit Agreement may change. The new rates may not be as favorable to us as those in effect prior to any LIBOR phase-out. In addition, the transition process may involve, among other things, increased volatility or illiquidity in markets for instruments that currently rely on LIBOR. The transition may also result in reductions in the value of certain instruments or the effectiveness of related transactions such as hedges, increased borrowing costs, uncertainty under applicable documentation, or difficult and costly consent processes. Any such effects of the transition away from LIBOR, as well as other unforeseen effects, may result in expenses, difficulties, complications or delays in connection with future financing efforts, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations. 
Some of our customers, prospective customers, suppliers or other companies with whom we conduct business may need assurances that our financial stability on a stand-alone basis is sufficient to satisfy their requirements for doing or continuing to do business with them. Any failure of parties to be satisfied with our financial stability could cause these parties to cease to do business with us, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
We may have potential business conflicts of interest with Honeywell with respect to our past and ongoing relationships.
Conflicts of interest may arise between Honeywell and us in a number of areas relating to our past and ongoing relationships, including:
 




 

•

labor, tax, employee benefit, indemnification and other matters arising from our separation from Honeywell;




 

•

intellectual property matters;




 

•

employee recruiting and retention; and




 

•

business combinations involving our company.
We may not be able to resolve any potential conflicts, and, even if we do so, the resolution may be less favorable to us than if we were dealing with a party with whom we were not previously affiliated.
Certain of our directors and employees may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their financial interests in Honeywell.
Because of their former positions with Honeywell, certain of our executive officers and directors own equity interests in Honeywell. Continuing ownership of Honeywell shares could create, or appear to create, potential conflicts of interest if we and Honeywell face decisions that could have implications for both us and Honeywell.
The allocation of intellectual property rights between Honeywell and us as part of the Spin-Off, and our shared use of certain intellectual property rights, could adversely impact our reputation, our ability to enforce certain intellectual property rights that are important to us and our competitive position.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into agreements with Honeywell governing the allocation of intellectual property rights related to our business. These agreements could adversely affect our position and options relating to intellectual property enforcement, licensing negotiations and monetization. We also may not have sufficient rights to grant sublicenses of intellectual property used in our business. These circumstances could adversely affect our ability to protect our competitive position in the industry.
31

 
Risks Relating to our Common Stock 
An active trading market for our common stock may not be sustained, and our stock price may fluctuate significantly.
The market price of our common stock may fluctuate widely, depending on many factors, some of which may be beyond our control, including:
 




 

•

actual or anticipated fluctuations in our results of operations due to factors related to our business;




 

•

success or failure of our business strategies;




 

•

competition and industry capacity;




 

•

changes in interest rates and other factors that affect earnings and cash flow;




 

•

our level of indebtedness, our ability to make payments on or service our indebtedness and our ability to obtain financing as needed;




 

•

our ability to retain and recruit qualified personnel;




 

•

our quarterly or annual earnings, or those of other companies in our industry;




 

•

announcements by us or our competitors of significant acquisitions or dispositions;




 

•

changes in accounting standards, policies, guidance, interpretations or principles;




 

•

the failure of securities analysts to cover, or positively cover, our common stock after the Spin-Off;




 

•

changes in earnings estimates by securities analysts or our ability to meet those estimates;




 

•

the operating and stock price performance of other comparable companies;




 

•

investor perception of our company and our industry;




 

•

overall market fluctuations unrelated to our operating performance;




 

•

results from any material litigation or government investigation;




 

•

changes in laws and regulations (including tax laws and regulations) affecting our business;




 

•

changes in capital gains taxes and taxes on dividends affecting stockholders; and




 

•

general economic conditions and other external factors.
Low trading volume for our stock, which may occur if an active trading market is not sustained, among other reasons, would amplify the effect of the above factors on our stock price volatility.
Should the market price of our stock drop significantly, stockholders may institute securities class action lawsuits against us. A lawsuit against us could cause us to incur substantial costs and could divert the time and attention of our management and other resources.
If we fail to maintain proper and effective internal controls, our ability to produce accurate and timely financial statements could be impaired and investors’ views of us could be harmed.
 
We are required to perform system and process evaluation and testing of our internal control over financial reporting to allow management and our independent registered public accounting firm to report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting, as required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. If we are not able to comply with the requirements of Section 404, the market price of shares of common stock could decline and we could be subject to sanctions or investigations by the SEC or other regulatory authorities, which would require additional financial and management resources.
 
32

 
Our ability to successfully comply with Section 404 requires us to be able to prepare timely and accurate financial statements. Any delay in the implementation of, or disruption in the transition to, new or enhanced systems, procedures or controls, may cause our operations to suffer, and we may be unable to conclude that our internal control over financial reporting is effective, and our independent registered public accounting firm may provide an adverse opinion on our internal control over financial reporting. In the course of preparing our Annual Report on Form 10-K and our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2018, our management determined that there was a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting relating to the supporting evidence for our liability to Honeywell under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement.  Even though we have concluded, and our auditors have concurred, that this material weakness has been remediated as of December 31, 2019, and that our internal control over financial reporting is effective as of that date, we could identify additional material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting in the future, which could cause us to have to restate our Combined and Consolidated Financial Statements. In the event of an additional material weakness or restatement, the market price of shares of common stock could decline and we could be subject to sanctions or investigations by the SEC or other regulatory authorities, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. See “—Risks Relating to the Spin-Off—As we build our information technology infrastructure and transition our data to our own systems, we could incur substantial additional costs and experience temporary business interruptions, and our accounting and other management systems and resources may not be adequately prepared to meet the financial reporting and other requirements to which we are subject.”
We plan to evaluate whether to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the future, and the terms of our indebtedness will limit our ability to pay dividends on our common stock.
We plan to evaluate whether to pay cash dividends to our stockholders. The timing, declaration, amount and payment of future dividends to stockholders, if any, will fall within the discretion of our board of directors. The Board’s decisions regarding the payment of dividends will depend on consideration of many factors, such as our financial condition, earnings, sufficiency of distributable reserves, opportunities to retain future earnings for use in the operation of our business and to fund future growth, capital requirements, debt service obligations, obligations under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, legal requirements, regulatory constraints and other factors that the Board deems relevant. Additionally, the terms of our Credit Agreement and obligations under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement limit our ability to pay cash dividends. There can be no assurance that we will pay a dividend in the future or continue to pay any dividend if we do commence paying dividends.
Your percentage ownership in us may be diluted in the future.
Your percentage ownership in us may be diluted in the future because of equity issuances for acquisitions, capital market transactions or otherwise, including equity awards that we will be granting to our directors, officers and other employees. We expect that shares of our common stock will be issuable upon the future vesting of certain Honeywell equity awards held by our employees that converted into Garrett equity awards in connection with the Spin-Off. Our Board has adopted and Honeywell, as our sole shareholder, approved, the 2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett and its Affiliates (the “Equity Plan”) for the benefit of certain of our current and future employees and other service providers. Our non-employee directors will be eligible to participate in the 2018 Stock Incentive Plan for Non-Employee Directors. Awards made under such plans will have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share, which could adversely affect the market price of our common stock. 
In addition, our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue, without the approval of our stockholders, one or more classes or series of preferred stock having such designation, powers, preferences and relative, participating, optional and other special rights, including preferences over our common stock with respect to dividends and distributions, as our board of directors may generally determine. The terms of one or more classes or series of preferred stock could dilute the voting power or reduce the value of our common stock. For example, we could grant the holders of preferred stock the right to elect some number of the members of our board of directors in all events or upon the happening of specified events, or the right to veto specified transactions. Similarly, the repurchase or redemption rights or liquidation preferences that we could assign to holders of preferred stock could affect the residual value of our common stock. 
33

 
From time-to-time, we may opportunistically evaluate and pursue acquisition opportunities, including acquisitions for which the consideration thereof may consist partially or entirely of newly-issued shares of our common stock and, therefore, such transactions, if consummated, would dilute the voting power and/or reduce the value of our common stock.
Certain provisions in our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Amended and Restated By-Laws and Delaware law may discourage takeovers.
Several provisions of our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, Amended and Restated By-Laws and Delaware law may discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition. These include, among others, provisions that:




 

•

provide for staggered terms for directors on our Board for a period following the Spin-Off;




 

•

do not permit our stockholders to act by written consent and require that stockholder action must take place at an annual or special meeting of our stockholders, in each case except as such rights may otherwise be provided to holders of preferred stock;




 

•

establish advance notice requirements for stockholder nominations and proposals;




 

•

limit the persons who may call special meetings of stockholders; and




 

•

limit our ability to enter into business combination transactions.
These and other provisions of our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, Amended and Restated By-Laws and Delaware law may discourage, delay or prevent certain types of transactions involving an actual or a threatened acquisition or change in control of Garrett, including unsolicited takeover attempts, even though the transaction may offer our stockholders the opportunity to sell their shares of our common stock at a price above the prevailing market price. 
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation designates the courts of the State of Delaware as the sole and exclusive forum for certain types of actions and proceedings that may be initiated by our stockholders, which could limit our stockholders’ ability to obtain a favorable judicial forum for disputes with us or our directors, officers or other employees.
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation provides, in all cases to the fullest extent permitted by law, unless we consent in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery located within the State of Delaware will be the sole and exclusive forum for any derivative action or proceeding brought on behalf of Garrett, any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any of our directors, officers or other employees or stockholders to us or our stockholders, any action asserting a claim arising pursuant to the Delaware General Corporate Law (“DGCL”) or as to which the DGCL confers jurisdiction on the Court of Chancery located in the State of Delaware or any action asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine or any other action asserting an “internal corporate claim” as that term is defined in Section 115 of the DGCL. However, if the Court of Chancery within the State of Delaware does not have jurisdiction, the action may be brought in any other state or federal court located within the State of Delaware. Any person or entity purchasing or otherwise acquiring or holding any interest in shares of our capital stock will be deemed to have notice of and to have consented to these provisions. This provision may limit a stockholder’s ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that it finds favorable for disputes with us or our directors, officers or other employees, which may discourage such lawsuits. Alternatively, if a court were to find this provision of our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation inapplicable to, or unenforceable in respect of, one or more of the specified types of actions or proceedings, we may incur additional costs associated with resolving such matters in other jurisdictions.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
34

 
Item 2. Properties
We have created a geographic footprint that emphasizes locating R&D, engineering and manufacturing capabilities in close physical proximity to our customers, thereby enabling us to manage our environmental footprint to meet our sustainability targets and to adopt technologies and products for the specific vehicle types sold in each geographic market. Over the past several years, we have invested heavily to be close to our Chinese, Indian and other high-growth region OEM customers to be able to offer world-leading technologies, localized engineering support and unparalleled manufacturing productivity.
As of December 31, 2019, we owned or leased 13 manufacturing sites, five R&D centers and 14 close-to- customer engineering sites. We also have many smaller sales offices, warehouses, cybersecurity and IVHM sites and other investments strategically located throughout the world. The following table shows the regional distribution of our manufacturing sites, R&D centers and customer engineering sites:
 




 

 

 

 

Europe,

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

Middle East &

 

South Asia &

 

 

 

 



 

 

North America

 

Africa

 

Asia Pacific

 

South America

 

Total



Manufacturing Sites

 

2

 

5

 

5

 

1

 

13



R&D Centers

 

2

 

1

 

2

 

0

 

5



Close-to-Customer Engineering Sites

 

3

 

7

 

3

 

1

 

14


 
We continually and proactively review our real estate portfolio and develop footprint strategies to support our customers’ global plans, while at the same time supporting our technical needs and optimizing operating cost base. We expect our evolving portfolio will meet current and anticipated future needs.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
On December 2, 2019, the Company and its subsidiary, Garrett ASASCO Inc., filed a Summons with Notice in the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York (the “NY Supreme Court”) commencing an action (the “Action”) against Honeywell, certain of Honeywell’s subsidiaries and certain of Honeywell’s employees for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duties, aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duties, corporate waste, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unjust enrichment. On January 15, 2020, the Company and Garrett ASASCO Inc. filed a Complaint in the NY Supreme Court in connection with the Action. The lawsuit arises from the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. The Company is seeking declaratory relief, compensatory damages in an amount to be determined at trial rescission of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, attorneys’ fees and costs, and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper. Among other claims, Garrett asserts that Honeywell is not entitled to indemnification because it improperly seeks indemnification for amounts attributable to punitive damages and intentional misconduct, and because it has failed to establish other prerequisites for indemnification under New York law.  Specifically, the claim asserts that Honeywell has failed to establish its right to indemnity for each and every asbestos settlement of the thousands for which it seeks indemnification. The Action seeks to establish that the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement is not enforceable, in whole or in part.
We are involved in various other lawsuits, claims and proceedings incident to the operation of our businesses, including those pertaining to product liability, product safety, environmental, safety and health, intellectual property, employment, commercial and contractual matters and various other matters. Although the outcome of any such lawsuit, claim or proceeding cannot be predicted with certainty and some may be disposed of unfavorably to us, we do not currently believe that such lawsuits, claims or proceedings will have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. We accrue for potential liabilities in a manner consistent with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Accordingly, we accrue for a liability when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability is reasonably estimable.
35

 
Additionally, in connection with our entry into the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, we are required to make payments to Honeywell for a certain amount of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not Applicable.
36

 
Part II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Market Information
On October 1, 2018, we became an independent publicly-traded company through a pro rata distribution by Honeywell of 100% of the outstanding shares of us to Honeywell's stockholders (the “Spin-Off”). Each Honeywell stockholder of record received one share of our common stock for every 10 shares of Honeywell common stock held on the record date. Approximately 74 million shares of our common stock were distributed on October 1, 2018 to Honeywell stockholders. In connection with the separation, our common stock began trading "regular-way" under the ticker symbol "GTX" on the New York Stock Exchange on October 1, 2018.
Holders of Record
As of February 25, 2020, there were 37,237 stockholders of record of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings to fund the development and growth of our business and to repay indebtedness, and therefore we do not anticipate declaring or paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. The timing, declaration, amount and payment of future dividends to stockholders, if any, will fall within the discretion of our Board. Among the items we will consider when establishing a dividend policy will be the capital needs of our business and opportunities to retain future earnings for use in the operation of our business and to fund future growth. Additionally, the terms of our Senior Credit Facilities and obligations under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement each will limit our ability to pay cash dividends. There can be no assurance that we will pay a dividend in the future or continue to pay any dividend if we do commence the payment of dividends.
37

 
Stock Performance Graph
The following graph and table illustrate the total return from October 1, 2018 through December 31, 2019, for (i) our common stock, (ii) the Standard and Poor’s (“S&P”) 600 Index, and (iii) the average stock performance of a group consisting of our peer companies (“Peer Group”), consisting of BorgWarner Inc., Allison Transmission Holdings, Inc., and Delphi Technologies Plc. The Peer Group is used routinely by management for benchmarking purposes. The graph and the table assume that $100 was invested on October 1, 2018 in each of our common stock, the S&P 600 Index, and the common stock of our Peer Group, and that any dividends were reinvested. The comparisons reflected in the graph and table are not intended to forecast the future performance of our common stock and may not be indicative of our future performance.
 




Indexed Price Performance




 

 




Global Markets Intelligence Group


 
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities 
None
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
There were no purchases of equity securities by the issuer or affiliated purchasers during the quarter ended December 31, 2019.
 
 
38

 
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
Selected Historical Consolidated and Combined Financial Data
The following tables present certain selected historical consolidated and combined financial information as of and for each of the years in the five-year period ended December 31, 2019. Prior to the Spin-Off on October 1, 2018, our historical financial statements were prepared on a stand-alone combined basis and were derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Honeywell. Accordingly, for periods prior to October 1, 2018, our financial statements are presented on a combined basis and for the periods subsequent to October 1, 2018 are presented on a consolidated basis (collectively, the historical financial statements for all periods presented are referred to as “Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements”). The selected historical consolidated and combined financial data as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 and for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017 are derived from the historical audited Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements as included in this Form 10-K. Certain amounts as of and for the year ended December 31, 2018 have been revised to correct for errors that were immaterial to our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2018 as described in Note 8 —Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The selected historical combined financial data as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 and for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 are derived from historical audited combined financial statements not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The selected historical combined financial data as of December 31, 2015 are derived from our unaudited combined financial information.
The selected historical consolidated and combined financial data presented below should be read in conjunction with “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and our historical Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For each of the periods presented prior to the Spin-Off, our business was wholly owned by Honeywell. The financial information included for these periods may not necessarily reflect our financial position, results of operations and cash flows in the future or what our financial position, results of operations and cash flows would have been had we been an independent, publicly traded company during such periods. In addition, our historical consolidated and combined financial information does not reflect changes that we have experienced or expect to continue to experience in the future as a result of our separation from Honeywell, including changes in the financing, operations, cost structure and personnel needs of our business.
Further, the historical consolidated and combined financial information includes allocations of certain Honeywell corporate expenses, as described in Note 3 Related Party Transactions with Honeywell in our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. We believe the assumptions and methodologies underlying the allocation of these expenses are reasonable. However, such expenses may not be indicative of the actual level of expense that we would have incurred if we had operated as an independent, publicly traded company or of the costs expected to be incurred in the future.
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

 

2018

 

 

 

2017

 

 

 

2016

 

 

 

2015

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)

 



Selected Statement of Operations
Information:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net sales

 

$

3,248

 

 

 

$

3,375

 

 

 

$

3,096

 

 

 

$

2,997

 

 

 

$

2,908

 



Net income (loss)

 

$

313

 

 

 

$

1,206

 

(1)

 

$

(983

)

(2)

 

$

199

 

 

 

$

254

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Earnings per common share (3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Basic:

 

$

4.20

 

 

 

$

16.28

 

 

 

$

(13.27

)

 

 

$

2.69

 

 

 

$

3.43

 



Diluted:

 

$

4.12

 

 

 

$

16.21

 

 

 

$

(13.27

)

 

 

$

2.69

 

 

 

$

3.43

 



Weighted average common shares (3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Basic:

 

 

74,602,868

 

 

 

 

74,059,240

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 



Diluted:

 

 

75,934,373

 

 

 

 

74,402,148

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 

 

 

 

74,070,852

 


39

 
 




 

 

As of December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

 

2018

 

(1)

 

2017

 

 

 

2016

 

 

 

2015

 



 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Selected Balance Sheet Information:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total assets

 

$

2,275

 

 

 

$

2,124

 

 

 

$

2,997

 

 

 

$

2,661

 

 

 

$

2,444

 



Long-term debt

 

$

1,409

 

 

 

$

1,569

 

 

 

$

—

 

 

 

$

—

 

 

 

$

116

 



Total liabilities

 

$

4,408

 

 

 

$

4,641

 

 

 

$

5,192

 

 

 

$

3,882

 

 

 

$

3,803

 



Total deficit

 

$

(2,133

)

 

 

$

(2,517

)

 

 

$

(2,195

)

 

 

$

(1,221

)

 

 

$

(1,359

)


 




(1)

2018 Net income was impacted by an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business resulting in a tax benefit of $907 million.




(2)

2017 Net income was impacted by the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) resulting in a tax expense of $1,335 million; see Note 7 Income Taxes of the Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for further details.




(3)

On October 1, 2018, the date of consummation of the Spin-Off, 74,070,852 shares of the Company’s common stock were distributed to Honeywell stockholders of record as of September 18, 2018. Basic and Diluted EPS for all periods prior to the Spin-Off reflect the number of distributed shares, or 74,070,852 shares. These shares were treated as issued and outstanding from January 1, 2015 for purposes of calculating historical earnings per share.
 
Non-GAAP Measures 
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to supplement the understanding of our business operation and performance, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial measure is presented along with the most directly comparable GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. The non-GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures used by other companies. Additionally, the non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s operating results as reported under GAAP.
40

 
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA(1) (2)
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Net income (loss)  — GAAP

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)



Net interest (income) expense

 

 

61

 

 

 

12

 

 

 

(6

)



Tax expense (benefit)

 

 

33

 

 

 

(810

)

 

 

1,349

 



Depreciation

 

 

73

 

 

 

72

 

 

 

64

 



EBITDA (Non-GAAP)

 

$

480

 

 

$

480

 

 

$

424

 



Other expense, net (which primarily
consists of indemnification, asbestos and
environmental expenses)(3)

 

 

40

 

 

 

120

 

 

 

130

 



Non-operating (income) expense(2)(4)

 

 

8

 

 

 

(2

)

 

 

—

 



Stock compensation expense(5)

 

 

18

 

 

 

21

 

 

 

15

 



Repositioning charges(6)

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

20

 



Foreign exchange (gain) loss on debt, net
of related hedging (gain) loss

 

 

7

 

 

 

(7

)

 

 

—

 



Spin-Off costs(7)

 

 

28

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

—

 



Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP)

 

$

583

 

 

$

620

 

 

$

589

 


 




(1)

We evaluate performance on the basis of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We define “EBITDA” as our net income (loss) calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, plus the sum of net interest (income) expense, tax (benefit) expense and depreciation. We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as EBITDA, plus the sum of non-operating (income) expense, net, other expense, net (which primarily consists of indemnification, asbestos and environmental expenses), stock compensation expense, repositioning charges, foreign exchange gain (loss) on debt, net of related hedging (gain) loss, non-service component of pension expense and Spin-Off costs. We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are important indicators of operating performance and provide useful information for investors because: 




 

•

EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA exclude the effects of income taxes, as well as the effects of financing and investing activities by eliminating the effects of interest and depreciation expenses and therefore more closely measure our operational performance; and




 

•

certain adjustment items, while periodically affecting our results, may vary significantly from period to period and have disproportionate effect in a given period, which affects comparability of our results.
In addition, our management may use Adjusted EBITDA in setting performance incentive targets in order to align performance measurement with operational performance.




(2)

We have elected to change our definition of Adjusted EBITDA to exclude the non-service component of pension expense.  Non-service pension expense is comprised of interest costs, expected return on plan assets and actuarial gains/losses. The components of non-service pension expense are primarily tied to financial market performance, changes in market interest rates and investment performance. The service cost component of our pension plans remains in Adjusted EBITDA. We consider the non-service component of pension expense to be outside the performance of our ongoing core business operations and believe that presenting Adjusted EBITDA including only the service component of pension expense, in addition to our GAAP operating results, provides increased transparency as to the operating costs of providing pension benefits to our employees and the underlying trends in our operating business performance. As a result, the prior periods presented were recast to conform to the current year presentation, resulting in a change in Adjusted EBITDA of $2 million and $1 million, for 2018 and 2017 respectively.




(3)

For periods prior to the Spin-Off, we reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. We recognized a liability for any asbestos-related contingency that was probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. In connection with the recognition of liabilities for asbestos-related matters, we recorded asbestos-related insurance recoveries that are deemed probable. In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to 
41

 





Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. See Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.




(4)

Non-operating (income) expense adjustment includes the non-service component of pension expense and other expense, net and excludes interest income, equity income of affiliates, and the impact of foreign exchange.




(5)

Stock compensation expense adjustment includes only non-cash expenses.




(6)

Repositioning charges adjustment primarily includes severance costs related to restructuring projects to improve future productivity.




(7)

Spin-Off costs primarily include costs incurred for the set-up of the IT, Legal, Finance, Communications and Human Resources functions after the Spin-Off from Honeywell on October 1, 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP) decreased by $37 million in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to unfavorable impacts of inflation ($26 million), unfavorable impact from price ($36 million), the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates including prior year’s hedge losses ($8 million) and unfavorable impact of higher research and development expenses ($1 million), partially offset by favorable impact of productivity net of mix ($20 million) and favorable impacts of volume ($14 million). 
 
Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for property, plant and equipment(1)
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Net cash provided by (used for) operating
activities — GAAP

 

 

242

 

 

 

373

 

 

 

71

 



Expenditures for property, plant and equipment

 

 

(102

)

 

 

(95

)

 

 

(103

)



Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for
property, plant and equipment (Non-GAAP)

 

$

140

 

 

$

278

 

 

$

(32

)


 




(1)

Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for property, plant and equipment is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects an additional way of viewing our liquidity that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a supplemental understanding of factors and trends affecting our cash flows. Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for property, plant and equipment is calculated by subtracting Expenditures for property, plant and equipment from Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities. We believe it is a more conservative measure of cash flow because purchases of fixed assets are necessary for ongoing operations. We believe it is important to view Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for property, plant and equipment as a supplement to our Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows.
 
Cash flow from operations less Expenditures for property, plant and equipment (non-GAAP) decreased by $138 million in 2019 versus 2018, primarily due to the decrease in cash provided by operating activities of $131 million which was driven by a decrease in Obligations to Honeywell of $67 million, higher cash interest payments of $46 million, a decrease in net income, net of deferred taxes of $3 million and a decrease of $39 million in other items (accrued liabilities and other assets), partially offset by a favorable impact from working capital of $24 million. Additionally, Expenditures for property, plant and equipment increased by $7 million in 2019 as compared to 2018. 
 
 
42

 
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, which we refer to as our “MD&A,” should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements and related notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Information Statement. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many important factors, including those set forth in the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied, by these forward-looking statements. 
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help you understand the results of operations and financial condition of Garrett Motion Inc. for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017. Certain amounts as of and for the year ended December 31, 2018 have been revised to correct for errors that were immaterial to our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2018 as described in Note 8 —Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.  Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Garrett,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and “the Company” refer to (i) Honeywell’s Transportation Systems Business (the “Transportation Systems Business” or the “Business”) prior to our spin-off from Honeywell International Inc. (the “Spin-Off”) and (ii) Garrett Motion Inc. and its subsidiaries following the Spin-Off, as applicable.
Overview and Business Trends
Garrett designs, manufactures and sells highly engineered turbocharger and electric-boosting technologies for light and commercial vehicle original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and the global vehicle and independent aftermarket. These OEMs in turn ship to consumers globally. We are a global technology leader with significant expertise in delivering products across gasoline, diesel and electric (hybrid and fuel cell) powertrains. These products are key enablers for fuel economy and emission standards compliance.
Market penetration of vehicles with a turbocharger is expected to increase from approximately 51% in 2019 to approximately 56% by 2023, according to IHS and other industry sources, which we believe will allow our business to grow at a faster rate than overall automobile production. The turbocharger market volume growth was particularly strong in China and other high-growth regions.
The growth trajectory for turbochargers is expected to continue, as the technology is one of the most cost- effective solutions for OEMs to address strict constraints for vehicle fuel efficiency and emissions standards. As a result, OEMs are increasing their adoption of turbocharger technologies across gasoline and diesel engines as well as hybrid-electric and fuel cell vehicles. In recent years, we have also seen a shift in demand from diesel engines to gasoline engines.
In particular, the commercial vehicle OEM market and light vehicle gasoline markets in China and other high-growth regions have increased due to favorable economic conditions and rising income levels which have led to an increase in automotive and vehicle content demand. While the respective growth rates may potentially decline as the local markets mature, we continue to expect an increase in future vehicle production utilizing turbocharger technologies as vehicle ownership remains well below ownership levels in developed markets.  We are closely monitoring the current novel coronavirus outbreak and its implications for the auto industry both within and outside China. We expect this outbreak to affect the auto industry primarily in 2020. We currently do not expect a long-term impact on industry demand beyond 2021.
Separation from Honeywell
On October 1, 2018, the Company became an independent publicly-traded company through a pro rata distribution by Honeywell of 100% of the then-outstanding shares of Garrett to Honeywell’s stockholders. Each Honeywell stockholder of record received one share of Garrett common stock for every 10 shares of Honeywell common stock held on the record date. Approximately 74 million shares of Garrett common stock were distributed on October 1, 2018 to Honeywell stockholders. In connection with the separation, Garrett´s common stock began trading “regular-way” under the ticker symbol “GTX” on the New York Stock Exchange on October 1, 2018.
43

 
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into an Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement (the “Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement”) and a Tax Matters Agreement (the “Tax Matters Agreement”) with Honeywell on September 12, 2018, each of which is described in this MD&A. In December 2019, we commenced a lawsuit against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, as described below.
Basis of Presentation
Prior to the Spin-Off on October 1, 2018, our historical financial statements were prepared on a stand–alone basis and derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Honeywell. Accordingly, for periods prior to October 1, 2018, our financial statements are presented on a combined basis and for the periods subsequent to October 1, 2018 are presented on a consolidated basis (collectively, the historical financial statements for all periods presented are referred to as “Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements”). The Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The historical consolidated and combined financial information may not be indicative of our future performance and does not necessarily reflect what our consolidated and combined results of operations, financial condition and cash flows would have been had the Business operated as a separate, publicly traded company during the periods presented, particularly because of changes that we have experienced and expect to continue to experience in the future as a result of our separation from Honeywell, including changes in the financing, cash management, operations, cost structure and personnel needs of our business.
For periods prior to the Spin-Off, the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include certain assets and liabilities that were held at the Honeywell corporate level prior to the Spin-Off but are specifically identifiable or otherwise allocable to the Business. Additionally, Honeywell provided certain services, such as legal, accounting, information technology, human resources and other infrastructure support, on behalf of the Business. The cost of these services has been allocated to the Business on the basis of the proportion of revenues. We consider these allocations to be a reasonable reflection of the benefits received by the Business. Actual costs that would have been incurred if the Business had been a stand-alone company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure and strategic decisions made in various areas, including information technology and infrastructure. We consider the basis on which the expenses have been allocated to be a reasonable reflection of the utilization of services provided to or the benefits received by the Business during the periods presented. 
Subsequent to the completion of the Spin-Off, we have incurred and continue to expect to incur expenditures consisting of employee-related costs, costs to start up certain stand-alone functions and information technology systems, and other one-time transaction related costs. Recurring stand-alone costs include establishing the internal audit, treasury, investor relations, tax and corporate secretary functions as well as the annual expenses associated with running an independent publicly traded company including listing fees, compensation of non-employee directors, related board of director fees and other fees and expenses related to insurance, legal and external audit. Recurring stand- alone costs that differ from historical allocations may have an impact on profitability and operating cash flows but we believe the impact will not be significant. As a stand-alone public company, we do not expect our recurring stand-alone corporate costs to be materially higher than the expenses historically allocated to us from Honeywell. 
Asbestos-Related and Environmental Liabilities
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. However, this recognition model differs from the recognition model applied subsequent to the Spin-Off. In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019 and in the fourth quarter of 2018, we paid Honeywell the Euro-equivalent of $153 million and $41million, respectively, in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. Garrett has made all payments under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement under protest, as described below.
 
44

 
On October 19, 2018, Honeywell disclosed in its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2018 (the “Honeywell Form 10-Q”) that the Division of Enforcement of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) opened an investigation into Honeywell’s prior accounting for liability for unasserted Bendix-related asbestos claims. In addition, Honeywell noted that it revised certain previously-issued financial statements to correct the time period associated with the determination of appropriate accruals for legacy Bendix asbestos-related liability for unasserted claims.
 
As disclosed, in Honeywell’s Current Report on  Form 8-K filed on August 28, 2019, the SEC informed Honeywell that it had concluded its investigation and that it does not intend to recommend any enforcement action against Honeywell. 
 
On December 2, 2019, we filed a Summons with Notice in the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York (“NY Supreme Court”) commencing an action (the “Action”) against Honeywell for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duties, aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duties, corporate waste, breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unjust enrichment. On January 15, 2020, we filed a Complaint in the NY Supreme Court in connection with the Action. The lawsuit arises from the Indemnification and Reimbursement agreement, which was not negotiated at arm’s – length, and purports to obligate Garrett to compensate Honeywell for payments relating to asbestos exposure arising from Honeywell’s legacy Bendix automotive brake business, including payments relating to punitive damages and defense costs. Our lawsuit seeks to establish that the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement is unenforceable in whole or part and that Honeywell has breached its obligations under this agreement by filing to provide us with information as to the underlying claims to which it is entitled. There can be no assurance as to the time and recourses that will be required to pursue these claims or the ultimate outcome of the lawsuit, but we intend to press these claims aggressively. Among other claims, Garrett asserts that Honeywell is not entitled to indemnification because it improperly seeks indemnification for amounts attributable to punitive damages and intentional misconduct, and because it has failed to establish other prerequisites for indemnification under New York law.  Specifically, the claim asserts that Honeywell has failed to establish its right to indemnity for each and every asbestos settlement of the thousands for which it seeks indemnification. The Action seeks to establish that the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement is not enforceable, in whole or in part. 
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
Net Sales
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Net sales

 

$

3,248

 

 

$

3,375

 

 

$

3,096

 



% change compared with prior period

 

 

(3.8

)%

 

 

9.0

%

 

 

3.3

%


 
The change in net sales compared to the prior year period is attributable to the following: 
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Volume

 

 

1.3

%

 

 

7.0

%



Price

 

 

(1.1

)%

 

 

(1.4

)%



Foreign Currency Translation

 

 

(4.0

)%

 

 

3.4

%



 

 

 

(3.8

)%

 

 

9.0

%


 
2019 compared with 2018
Our net sales for 2019 were $3,248 million, a decrease of $127 million or 3.8% (including a negative impact of 4.0% due to foreign currency translation), from $3,375 million in 2018. The decrease in sales was primarily driven by light vehicles OEM products decline of $57 million, commercial vehicles OEM products decline of $39 million, aftermarket products decline of $20 million and other products decline of $10 million.
 
45

 
Our light vehicles OEM product decline was primarily driven by lower diesel volumes in Europe and Asia, partially offset by higher gasoline volumes as a result of increased turbocharger penetration in gasoline engines and new product launches. The decrease in net sales for commercial vehicles is mainly driven by lower volumes in Europe and North America. The decrease in aftermarket product sales was primarily driven by a volume decrease in Europe.  
2018 compared with 2017
Our net sales for 2018 were $3,375 million, an increase of $279 million, or 9.0% (including a favorable impact of 3.4% due to foreign currency translation), from $3,096 million in 2017, primarily driven by increases in sales volume partially offset by price reductions. The increase in sales volume, net of price reductions, was primarily driven by light vehicles OEM products growth of $220 million, commercial vehicles OEM products growth of $59 million and aftermarket products growth of $8 million.
Our light vehicles OEM product growth was primarily driven by increased gasoline volumes in Europe, China, North America, and South Korea, as a result of increased turbocharger penetration in gasoline engines and new product launches. Additionally, there were increased diesel volumes in China and Japan partially offset by lower diesel volumes to our OEM customers in Europe and South Korea. The commercial vehicles OEM product growth was primarily driven by volume increases in North America and Europe. Our slight aftermarket sales increase was primarily driven by higher volumes in Europe partially offset by lower volumes in Japan.
Cost of Goods Sold
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Cost of goods sold

 

$

2,537

 

 

$

2,599

 

 

$

2,361

 



% change compared with prior period

 

 

(2.4

)%

 

 

10.1

%

 

 

(0.2

)%



Gross Profit percentage

 

 

21.9

%

 

 

23.0

%

 

 

23.7

%


 
2019 compared with 2018
Cost of goods sold for 2019 was $2,537 million, a decrease of $62 million or 2.4% from $2,599 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in direct material costs and labor costs of $113 million primarily due to changes in foreign exchange rates and increases in productivity of $98 million, partially offset by unfavorable impacts from volume and mix of $141 million and other impacts of $8 million. Gross profit percentage decreased primarily due to unfavorable impacts from mix (2.8 percentage points), price (0.9 percentage points) and the unfavorable impacts from inflation (0.7 percentage points), partially offset by the favorable impact of productivity (3.1 percentage points) and the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates (0.2 percentage points). 
2018 compared with 2017
Cost of goods sold for 2018 was $2,599 million, an increase of $238 million, or 10.1%, from $2,361 million in 2017. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in direct material costs and labor of $215 million, or 12%, (principally due to an increase in volume). Gross profit percentage decreased primarily due to unfavorable impacts from mix and price (3.1 percentage point impact) and inflation (1 percentage point impact), partially offset by higher productivity (3.0 percentage point impact) and net reductions in repositioning and other costs (0.6 percentage point impact).
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Selling, general and administrative expense

 

$

249

 

 

$

249

 

 

$

249

 



% of sales

 

 

7.7

%

 

 

7.4

%

 

 

8.0

%


 
46

 
2019 compared with 2018
Selling, general and administrative expenses were flat for 2019 compared to 2018 leading to an increase in expenses as a percentage of sales. 
 
2018 compared with 2017
Selling, general and administrative expenses were flat for 2018 compared with 2017 leading to a decline in expenses as a percentage of sales.
Other Expense, Net
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Other expense, net

 

$

40

 

 

$

120

 

 

$

130

 



% of sales

 

 

1.2

%

 

 

3.6

%

 

 

4.2

%


 
2019 compared with 2018
Other expense, net decreased in 2019 by $80 million compared to 2018. For 2019, Other expense, net of $40 million primarily reflects $28 million of legal fees incurred in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, $11 million of litigation legal fees in connection with the pending litigation against Honeywell, and $1 million in factoring and notes receivables discount fees. For 2018, Other expense, net of $120 million was primarily driven by asbestos-related charges, net of probable insurance recoveries of $131 million.
 
2018 compared with 2017
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. For the nine months ended September 30, 2018, compared to the same period in 2017, Other expense, net increased by $3 million due to a $6 million increase in environmental charges, partially offset by a $3 million decrease in asbestos charges.
Following the Spin-Off in 2018, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement as described above in the Asbestos-Related and Environmental Liabilities section. During the fourth quarter of 2018, we recognized a $16 million benefit related to a reduction in Honeywell´s long-term estimate of asbestos claims experience, net of legal fees for the quarter, in connection to the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, in comparison to a $1 million environmental charge in the same period of 2017.
Interest Expense
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Interest Expense

 

$

68

 

 

$

19

 

 

$

8

 


 
2019 compared with 2018 
 
Interest expense in 2019, was $68 million, an increase of $49 million from $19 million in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by interest expense related to our long-term debt. Prior to the Spin-Off, interest expense was primarily related to related party notes from cash pool arrangements with our Former Parent which were settled in cash prior to the Spin-Off.
47

 
2018 compared with 2017 
 
Following the Spin-Off, interest expense primarily relates to interest on our long-term debt. Prior to the Spin-Off, interest expense primarily related to related party notes from cash pool arrangements with our Former Parent which were settled in cash prior to the Spin-Off. Interest expense for 2018, was $19 million, an increase of $11 million from $8 million in 2017. This increase was primarily driven by interest expense related to our long-term debt of $17 million partially offset by a decrease in related party notes interest expense of $5 million. See Note 3 Related Party Transactions with Honeywell and Note 16 Long-term Debt and Credit Agreements of Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Non-operating expense (income)
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Non-operating expense (income)

 

$

8

 

 

$

(8

)

 

$

(18

)


 
2019 compared with 2018 
Non-operating expense (income) in 2019 decreased to an expense of $8 million from an income of ($8) million in the prior year period, primarily driven by $6 million of marked to market pension costs and other non-service components of pension costs, $7 million of foreign exchange costs, net of hedging and a $4 million decrease in interest income from bank accounts and marketable securities.  
2018 compared with 2017 
Non-operating (income) expense for 2018 decreased to income of ($8) million from income of ($18) million in 2017. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in interest income from bank accounts and marketable securities of $7 million and an increase in non-service related pension ongoing (income) expense of $3 million.
Tax Expense (Benefit)
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Tax expense (benefit)

 

$

33

 

 

$

(810

)

 

$

1,349

 



Effective tax rate

 

 

9.5

%

 

 

(204.5

)%

 

 

368.6

%


 
2019 compared with 2018 
 
The effective tax rate increased by 214.0 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to the absence of approximately $910 million of non-recurring tax benefits in 2018 because of a reduction in withholding taxes incurred as part of an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business in advance of the Spin-Off. The increase was partially offset by approximately $60 million of tax benefits related to the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities for tax law changes enacted during 2019, primarily in Switzerland.
 
2018 compared with 2017
 
The effective tax rate decreased by 573.1 percentage points in 2018 compared to 2017. The decrease was primarily attributable to the absence of approximately $1,335 million of expense related to the Tax Act incurred during 2017 and approximately $910 million of tax benefits from a reduction of withholding taxes incurred as part of an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business in advance of the Spin-Off. The impacts of the Tax Act during 2017 primarily consisted of a tax charge of $354 million related to the imposition of the one-time mandatory transition tax on the Company’s undistributed foreign earnings (see below for amounts payable to Honeywell) and a $980 million tax charge because of a change in the Company’s intent to no longer permanently reinvest its undistributed foreign earnings outside the US.  The $980 million tax charge primarily consisted of withholding taxes on future distributions which were subsequently reduced to approximately $50 million during 2018 primarily in connection with an internal restructuring.   
48

 
Net Income (loss)
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Net Income (loss)

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)


 
2019 compared with 2018
As a result of the factors described above, net income was $313 million in 2019 as compared to net income of $1,206 million in 2018. Net income for 2018 includes an $879 million tax benefit from reduced withholding taxes on undistributed earnings and no interest expense related to our long-term debt raised at the time of the Spin-Off. 
 
2018 compared with 2017
As a result of the factors described above, net income was $1,206 million in 2018 as compared to net loss of $983 million in 2017.
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We expect that our primary cash requirements in 2020 will primarily be to fund operating activities, working capital, and capital expenditures, and to meet our obligations under the debt instruments and the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement described below, as well as the Tax Matters Agreement. In addition, we may engage in repurchases of our debt and equity securities from time to time. We believe we will meet our known or reasonably likely future cash requirements through the combination of cash flows from operating activities, available cash balances and available borrowings through our debt agreements. If these sources of liquidity need to be augmented, additional cash requirements would likely be financed through the issuance of debt or equity securities; however, there can be no assurances that we will be able to obtain additional debt or equity financing on acceptable terms in the future. Based upon our history of generating strong cash flows, we believe we will be able to meet our short-term liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months.
Senior Credit Facilities
On September 27, 2018, we entered into a Credit Agreement, by and among us, Garrett LX I S.à r.l., Garrett LX II S.à r.l. (“Lux Guarantor”), Garrett LX III S.à r.l. (“Lux Borrower”), Garrett Borrowing LLC (in such capacity, the “US Co-Borrower”), and Honeywell Technologies Sàrl (“Swiss Borrower” and, together with Lux Borrower and US Co-Borrower, the “Borrowers”), the lenders and issuing banks party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Credit Agreement”).
The Credit Agreement provides for senior secured financing of approximately the Euro equivalent of $1,254 million, consisting of (i) a seven-year senior secured first-lien term B loan facility, which consists of a tranche denominated in Euro of €375 million and a tranche denominated in U.S. Dollars of $425 million (the “Term B Facility”), (ii) five-year senior secured first-lien term A loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of €330 million (the “Term A Facility” and, together with the Term B Facility, the “Term Loan Facilities”) and (iii) a five-year senior secured first-lien revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of €430 million with revolving loans to Swiss Borrower, to be made available in a number of currencies including Australian Dollars, Euros, Pounds Sterling, Swiss Francs, U.S. Dollars and Yen (the “Revolving Facility” and, together with the Term Loan Facilities, the “Senior Credit Facilities”). Each of the Revolving Facility and the Term A Facility matures five years after the effective date of the Credit Agreement, in each case with certain extension rights in the discretion of each lender. The Term B Facility matures seven years after the effective date of the Credit Agreement, with certain extension rights in the discretion of each lender.
49

 
The Senior Credit Facilities are subject to an interest rate, at our option, of either (a) base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate” in the United States, (2) the greater of the federal funds effective rate and the overnight bank funding rate, plus 0.5% and (3) the one month adjusted LIBOR rate, plus 1% per annum (“ABR”), (b) an adjusted LIBOR rate (“LIBOR”) (which shall not be less than zero), or (c) an adjusted EURIBOR rate (“EURIBOR”) (which shall not be less than zero), in each case, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin for the U.S. Dollar tranche of the Term B Facility is currently 2.50% per annum (for LIBOR loans) and 1.50% per annum (for ABR loans) while that for the euro tranche of the Term B Facility is currently 2.75% per annum (for EURIBOR loans). The applicable margin for each of the Term A Facility and the Revolving Credit Facility varies based on our leverage ratio. Accordingly, the interest rates for the Senior Credit Facilities will fluctuate during the term of the Credit Agreement based on changes in the ABR, LIBOR, EURIBOR or future changes in our leverage ratio. Interest payments with respect to the Term Loan Facilities are required either on a quarterly basis (for ABR loans) or at the end of each interest period (for LIBOR and EURIBOR loans) or, if the duration of the applicable interest period exceeds three months, then every three months.
We are obligated to make quarterly principal payments throughout the term of the Term Loan Facilities according to the amortization provisions in the Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are prepayable at our option without premium or penalty. We may request to extend the maturity date of all or a portion of the Senior Credit Facilities subject to certain conditions customary for financings of this type. The Credit Agreement also contains certain mandatory prepayment provisions in the event that we incur certain types of indebtedness or receive net cash proceeds from certain non-ordinary course asset sales or other dispositions of property, in each case subject to terms and conditions customary for financings of this type. 
The Credit Agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants customary for financings of this type that, among other things, limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness or liens, to dispose of assets, to make certain fundamental changes, to enter into restrictive agreements, to make certain investments, loans, advances, guarantees and acquisitions, to prepay certain indebtedness and to pay dividends, to make other distributions or redemptions/ repurchases, in respect of the our and our subsidiaries’ equity interests, to engage in transactions with affiliates, amend certain material documents or to permit the International Financial Reporting Standards equity amount of Lux Borrower to decrease below a certain amount. The Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants requiring the maintenance of a consolidated total leverage ratio of not greater than 4.00 to 1.00 (with step-downs to (i) 3.75 to 1.00 in September 2020 and (ii) 3.50 to 1.00 in September 2021), and a consolidated interest coverage ratio of not less than 2.75 to 1.00. We were in compliance with our financial covenants as of December 31, 2019.
Senior Notes
On September 27, 2018, we completed the offering of €350 million (approximately $410 million based on exchange rates as of September 27, 2018) in aggregate principal amount of 5.125% senior notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”). The Senior Notes bear interest at a fixed annual interest rate of 5.125% and mature on October 15, 2026. 
The Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated September 27, 2018 (the “Indenture”), which, among other things and subject to certain limitations and exceptions, limits our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur, assume or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain disqualified equity interests and preferred shares, (ii) pay dividends or distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, capital stock and make other restricted payments, (iii) make investments, (iv) consummate certain asset sales or transfers, (v) engage in certain transactions with affiliates, (vi) grant or assume certain liens on assets to secure debt unless the notes are secured equally and ratably (vii) restrict dividends and other payments by certain of their subsidiaries and (vii) consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our or our restricted subsidiaries’ assets.
Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement 
On September 12, 2018, we entered into the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, under which we are required to make certain payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. Pursuant to the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, we are responsible for paying to Honeywell such amounts, up to a cap equal to the Distribution Date Currency Exchange Rate (1.16977 USD = 1 EUR) equivalent of $175 million (exclusive of any late payment fees) in respect of such liabilities arising in any given calendar year. This Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement may have material adverse effects on our liquidity and cash flows and on our results of operations, 
50

 
regardless of whether we experience a decline in net sales. See “We are subject to risks associated with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, pursuant to which we are required to make substantial cash payments to Honeywell, measured in substantial part by reference to estimates by Honeywell of certain of its liabilities.” The payments that we are required to make to Honeywell pursuant to the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement will not be deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 and in the fourth quarter of 2018, we paid Honeywell, under protest, the Euro-equivalent of $153 million and $41 million, respectively, in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement.  Based on information received related to indemnifiable payments made by Honeywell, we estimate that the 2019 payment includes approximately $34 million of overpayments which, if confirmed by Honeywell in the Prior Year Aggregate Loss Statement (as defined in the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement), will be deducted from the indemnity payment for the second quarter of 2020 in accordance with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement.
We are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. For additional information, see Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Tax Matters Agreement
On September 12, 2018, we entered into a Tax Matters Agreement with Honeywell. The Tax Matters Agreement governs the respective rights, responsibilities and obligations of Honeywell and us after the Spin-Off with respect to all tax matters (including tax liabilities, tax attributes, tax returns and tax contests).
The Tax Matters Agreement generally provides that we are responsible and will indemnify Honeywell for all taxes, including income taxes, sales taxes, VAT and payroll taxes, relating to Garrett for all periods, including periods prior to the completion date of the Spin-Off. Among other items, as a result of the mandatory transition tax imposed by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, one of our subsidiaries is required to make payments to a subsidiary of Honeywell in the amount representing the net tax liability of Honeywell under the mandatory transition tax attributable to us, as determined by Honeywell. We estimate that our total aggregate payments to Honeywell with respect to the mandatory transition tax will be $240 million with $193 million in payments remaining as of December 31, 2019. Under the terms of the Tax Matters Agreement, we are required to pay this amount in Euros, without interest, in five annual installments, each equal to 8% of the aggregate amount, followed by three additional annual installments equal to 15%, 20% and 25% of the aggregate amount, respectively. In connection with this agreement, we paid Honeywell the Euro-equivalent of $18 million and $19 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively.
In addition, the Tax Matters Agreement addresses the allocation of liability for taxes incurred as a result of restructuring activities undertaken to effectuate the Spin-Off. The Tax Matters Agreement also provides that we are required to indemnify Honeywell for certain taxes (and reasonable expenses) resulting from the failure of the Spin-Off and related internal transactions to qualify for their intended tax treatment under U.S. federal, state and local income tax law, as well as foreign tax law. 
The Tax Matters Agreement also imposes certain restrictions on us and our subsidiaries (including restrictions on share issuances, redemptions or repurchases, business combinations, sales of assets and similar transactions) that are designed to address compliance with Section 355 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and are intended to preserve the tax-free nature of the Spin-Off.
51

 
Cash Flow Summary for the Years Ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, as reflected in the audited Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, are summarized as follows:
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Cash provided by (used for):

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Operating activities

 

$

242

 

 

$

373

 

 

$

71

 



Investing activities

 

 

(86

)

 

 

192

 

 

 

30

 



Financing activities

 

 

(163

)

 

 

(658

)

 

 

60

 



Effect of exchange rate changes on cash

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(11

)

 

 

20

 



Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents

 

$

(9

)

 

$

(104

)

 

$

181

 


 
2019 compared with 2018
Cash provided by operating activities decreased by $131 million for 2019 in comparison to 2018, primarily due to a a decrease in Obligations to Honeywell of $67 million, higher cash interest payments of $46 million, a decrease in net income, net of deferred taxes of $3 million and a decrease of $39 million in other items (accrued liabilities and other assets), partially offset by a favorable impact from working capital of $24 million. 
Cash provided by investing activities decreased by $278 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to unfavorable net cash impacts from marketable securities investments activities year over year of $291 million and unfavorable impact from Expenditures for property, plant and equipment of $7 million, partially offset by a favorable impact from the cash settlement received on the re-couponing of our cross currency swap contract of $19 million.
Cash used for financing activities decreased by $495 million in 2019, as compared to 2018. The change was driven by payments for related party notes payable of $493 million, net changes to cash pooling and short-term notes of $300 million and the net decrease in invested deficit of $1,493 million during 2018 that did not recur during 2019. This was partially offset by the $1,631 million of proceeds from issuance of long-term debt during 2018 that did not recur during 2019 and payments of long-term debt during 2019 of $163 million, as compared to $6 million during 2018.
2018 compared with 2017
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $302 million for 2018 in comparison to 2017, primarily due to a decrease in cash taxes paid of $354 million and favorable impacts from working capital of $35 million partially offset by an unfavorable impact from changes in Payables to related parties of $82 million. 
Cash provided by investing activities increased by $162 million for 2018 in comparison to 2017, primarily due to favorable net cash impacts from marketable securities investment activities year over year of $230 million, partially offset by a decrease in proceeds from related party notes receivables of $66 million. 
Cash used for financing activities increased by $718 million for 2018 in comparison to 2017 primarily due to a decrease in proceeds from related party notes payable year over year of $671 million. Additionally, there was $1,631 million in proceeds from issuance of long-term debt in 2018 partially offset by unfavorable impacts from changes in Invested deficit period over period of $1,474 million.
52

 
Contractual Obligations and Probable Liability Payments
The following is a summary of our significant contractual obligations and probable liability payments at December 31, 2019:
 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Payments by Period

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Total(5)

 

 

 

 

2020

 

 

2021-2022

 

 

2023-2024

 

 

Thereafter

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Obligations to Honeywell – Asbestos and
environmental(1)

 

 

1,090

 

 

 

 

 

51

 

 

 

192

 

 

 

175

 

 

 

672

 



Obligations to Honeywell – Mandatory
Transition Tax(2)

 

 

193

 

 

 

 

 

18

 

 

 

36

 

 

 

81

 

 

 

58

 



Long-term debt(3)

 

 

1,440

 

 

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

68

 

 

 

231

 

 

 

1,137

 



Interest payments on long-term debt(4)

 

 

266

 

 

 

 

 

45

 

 

 

89

 

 

 

79

 

 

 

53

 



Minimum lease payments

 

 

44

 

 

 

 

 

9

 

 

 

13

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

12

 



Purchase obligations(5)

 

 

93

 

 

 

 

 

84

 

 

 

9

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



 

 

$

3,126

 

 

 

 

$

211

 

 

$

407

 

 

$

576

 

 

$

1,932

 


 




(1)

Excludes legal fees which are expensed as incurred. For additional information, refer to “—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement” section. 




(2)

Excludes the indemnification obligation for uncertain tax positions for which timing of payment is uncertain. For additional information, refer to “—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Tax Matters Agreement” section. 




(3)

Assumes all long-term debt is outstanding until scheduled maturity. Does not include expected utilization of our revolving credit facility.




(4)

Interest payments are estimated based on the interest rates applicable as of December 31, 2019. This includes the impact of the cross currency interest rate swap and the interest rate swaps.  This does not include the expected utilization of our revolving credit facility.




(5)

Purchase obligations are entered into with various vendors in the normal course of business and are consistent with our expected requirements.
Capital Expenditures
We believe our capital spending in recent years has been sufficient to maintain efficient production capacity, to implement important product and process redesigns and to expand capacity to meet increased demand.
Productivity projects have freed up capacity in our manufacturing facilities and are expected to continue to do so. We expect to continue investing to expand and modernize our existing facilities and invest in our facilities to create capacity for new product development.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet financial arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles is based on the selection and application of accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our financial statements. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
53

 
Contingent Liabilities—We are subject to lawsuits, investigations and claims that arise out of the conduct of our global business operations or those of previously owned entities, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government contracts, product liability (including asbestos), prior acquisitions and divestitures, employee benefit plans, intellectual property, legal and environmental, health and safety matters. We continually assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments or outcomes to our contingencies, as well as potential amounts or ranges of probable losses, and recognize a liability, if any, for these contingencies based on a careful analysis of each matter with the assistance of outside legal counsel and, if applicable, other experts. Such analysis includes making judgments concerning matters such as the costs associated with environmental matters, the outcome of negotiations, the number and cost of pending and future asbestos claims, and the impact of evidentiary requirements. Because most contingencies are resolved over long periods of time, liabilities may change in the future due to new developments (including new discovery of facts, changes in legislation and outcomes of similar cases through the judicial system), changes in assumptions or changes in our settlement strategy. See Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for a discussion of management’s judgment applied in the recognition and measurement of our environmental and asbestos liabilities which represent our most significant contingencies.
Asbestos-Related Contingencies and Insurance Recoveries—Honeywell is subject to certain asbestos-related and environmental-related liabilities, primarily related to its legacy Bendix business. In conjunction with the Spin-Off, certain operations that were part of the Bendix business, along with the ownership of the Bendix trademark, as well as certain operations that were part of other legacy elements of the Business, were transferred to us. For periods prior to the Spin-Off, we reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. We recognized a liability for any asbestos-related contingency that was probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. In connection with the recognition of liabilities for asbestos-related matters, we recorded asbestos-related insurance recoveries that are deemed probable. Asbestos-related expenses, net of probable insurance recoveries, are presented within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations.
In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
We are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. For additional information, see Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Warranties and Guarantees—Expected warranty costs for products sold are recognized based on an estimate of the amount that eventually will be required to settle such obligations. These accruals are based on factors such as past experience, length of the warranty and various other considerations. Costs of product recalls, which may include the cost of the product being replaced as well as the customer’s cost of the recall, including labor to remove and replace the recalled part, are accrued as part of our warranty accrual at the time an obligation becomes probable and can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are adjusted from time to time based on facts and circumstances that impact the status of existing claims. See Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included herein for additional information.
54

 
Pension Benefits—We sponsor defined benefit pension plans covering certain employees, primarily in Switzerland, the U.S. and Ireland. For such plans, we are required to disaggregate the service cost component of net benefit costs and report those costs in the same line item or items in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the pertinent employees during the period. The other nonservice components of net benefit costs are required to be presented separately from the service cost component. We record the service cost component of Pension ongoing (income) expense in Cost of goods sold or Selling, general and administrative expenses. The remaining components of net benefit costs within Pension ongoing (income) expense, primarily interest costs and assumed return on plan assets, are recorded in Non-operating expense (income). We recognize net actuarial gains or losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the fair value of plan assets or the plans’ projected benefit obligation (the corridor) annually in the fourth quarter each year (“MTM Adjustment”). The MTM Adjustment is recorded in Non-operating expense (income).
The key assumptions used in developing our 2019 net periodic pension (income) expense included the following:
 




 

 

2019

 



 

 

U.S. Plans

 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



Discount Rate:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Projected benefit obligation

 

 

4.44

%

 

 

1.65

%



Service Cost

 

 

4.47

%

 

 

1.20

%



Interest cost

 

 

4.06

%

 

 

1.74

%



Assets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Expected rate of return

 

 

5.80

%

 

 

3.34

%



Actual rate of return

 

 

21.26

%

 

 

10.91

%


 
The MTM Adjustment represents the recognition of net actuarial gains or losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the fair value of plan assets or the plans’ projected benefit obligation (the corridor). Net actuarial gains and losses occur when the actual experience differs from any of the various assumptions used to value our pension plans or when assumptions change. The primary factors contributing to actuarial gains and losses are changes in the discount rate used to value pension obligations as of the measurement date each year and the difference between expected and actual returns on plan assets. The mark-to-market accounting method results in the potential for volatile and difficult to forecast MTM Adjustments. MTM charges were $0 for our U.S. Plans and $13 million for our non-U.S. Plans for the year ended December 31, 2019. 
We determine the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets utilizing historical plan asset returns over varying long-term periods combined with our expectations of future market conditions and asset mix considerations (see Note 24 Defined Benefit Pension Plan of Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for details on the actual various asset classes and targeted asset allocation percentages for our pension plans). We plan to use an expected rate of return on plan assets of 5.49% for our U.S. Plans and 3.79% for our non-U.S. Plans for 2020 as this is a long-term rate based on historical plan asset returns over varying long-term periods combined with our expectations of future market conditions and the asset mix of the plan’s investments.
The discount rate reflects the market rate on December 31 (measurement date) for high-quality fixed-income investments with maturities corresponding to our benefit obligations and is subject to change each year. The discount rate can be volatile from year to year as it is determined based upon prevailing interest rates as of the measurement date. We used a 3.30% discount rate to determine benefit obligations for our U.S. Plans and 0.79% for our non-U.S. Plans as of December 31, 2019.
Pension ongoing expense for all of our pension plans is expected to be $1 million in 2020 compared with pension ongoing expense of $2 million in 2019. Also, if required, an MTM Adjustment will be recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020 in accordance with our pension accounting method as previously described. It is difficult to reliably forecast or predict whether there will be an MTM Adjustment in 2020, and if one is required, what the magnitude of such adjustment will be. MTM Adjustments are primarily driven by events and circumstances beyond the control of the Company such as changes in interest rates and the performance of the financial markets.
55

 
For periods prior to the Spin-off, certain Garrett employees participated in defined benefit pension plans (the “Shared Plans”) sponsored by Honeywell which includes participants of other Honeywell subsidiaries and operations. We account for our participation in the Shared Plans as a multiemployer benefit plan. Accordingly, we do not record an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of the Shared Plans. The related pension expense is based on annual service cost of active Garrett participants and reported within Cost of goods sold in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. The pension expense specifically identified for the active Garrett participants in the Shared Plans for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $5 million and $7 million, respectively.
Income Taxes—We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method which requires us to recognize current tax liabilities or receivables for the amount of taxes we estimate are payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and their respective tax bases of assets and liabilities and the expected benefits of net operating loss and credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period enacted. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income and the reversal of deferred tax liabilities during the period in which related temporary differences become deductible. 
Our pre-Spin-Off activity in the U.S. will be reported in Honeywell’s U.S. consolidated income tax return and certain foreign activity will be reported in Honeywell tax paying entities in those jurisdictions. For periods prior to the Spin-Off, the income tax provision included in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements related to domestic and certain foreign operations was calculated on a separate return basis, as if Garrett was a separate taxpayer and the resulting current tax receivable or liability, including any liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, was settled with Honeywell through equity at the time of the Spin-Off. In other foreign taxing jurisdictions, the operations of Garrett were always conducted through discrete legal entities, each of which filed separate tax returns, and all resulting income tax assets and liabilities, including liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, are reflected in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets of Garrett.
Other Matters
Litigation and Environmental Matters
See Note 23. Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental, asbestos and other litigation matters.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
 
 
56

 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risks
Foreign Currency Risk
We are exposed to market risks from changes in currency exchange rates. These exposures may impact future earnings and/or operating cash flows. Our exposure to market risk for changes in foreign currency exchange rates arises from international financing activities between subsidiaries, foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities and transactions arising from international trade. 
We hedge currency exposures with natural offsets to the fullest extent possible and, once these opportunities have been exhausted, through foreign currency exchange forward contracts (Foreign Currency Exchange Contracts). We hedge monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies. Prior to conversion into U.S. dollars, these assets and liabilities are remeasured at spot exchange rates in effect on the balance sheet date. The effects of changes in spot rates are recognized in earnings and included in Non-operating expense (income). 
The Company initiated a cash flow hedging program in the first quarter of 2019 and has since then entered into forward currency exchange contracts to mitigate exposure to foreign currency exchange rate volatility and the associated impact on earnings related to forecasted foreign currency commitments. These forward currency exchange contracts are assessed as highly effective and are designated as cash flow hedges. Gains and losses on derivatives qualifying as cash flow hedges are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until the underlying transactions are recognized in earnings. On June 7, 2019, the Company entered into interest rate swap contracts to limit its exposure to interest rate risk by converting the interest payments on variable rate debt to fixed rate payments. These interest rate swaps have not been designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes.
On September 27, 2018, the Company entered into a floating-floating cross-currency swap contract to hedge the foreign currency exposure from foreign currency-denominated debt which will mature on September 27, 2025. In May 2019, the Company re-couponed the cross-currency swap contract with its counterparties and received a cash settlement of $19 million. The gain or loss on this derivative instrument is recognized in earnings and included in Non-operating expense (income). For the year ended December 31, 2019, gains recorded in Non-operating expense (income), under the cross-currency swap contract were $1 million.
At December 31, 2019, we had contracts with notional amounts of $1,259 million, to exchange foreign currencies, principally the U.S. Dollar, Swiss Franc, British Pound, Euro, Chinese Yuan, Japanese Yen, Mexican Peso, New Romanian Leu, Czech Crown, Australian Dollar and Korean Won.
As of December 31, 2019, the net fair value of all financial instruments with exposure to currency risk was a $1 million asset. The potential loss or gain in fair value for such financial instruments from a hypothetical 10% adverse or favorable change in quoted currency exchange rates would be $(63) million and $66 million at December 31, 2019 exchange rates. The model assumes a parallel shift in currency exchange rates; however, currency exchange rates rarely move in the same direction. The assumption that currency exchange rates change in a parallel fashion may overstate the impact of changing currency exchange rates on assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Interest Rate Risk
Our exposure to risk based on changes in interest rates relates primarily to our Credit Agreement. On June 7, 2019, we entered into interest rate swaps for a total notional value of $561 million and with respective maturities of June and December 2020, September 2023 and September 2025. The Credit Agreement bears interest at floating rates. For variable rate debt, interest rate changes generally do not affect the fair market value of such debt assuming all other factors remain constant but do impact future earnings and cash flows. Accordingly, we may be exposed to interest rate risk on borrowings under the Credit Agreement. For our outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2019, a 25 basis point increase (decrease) in interest rates would have increased (decreased) our interest expense by $1 million and $1 million, respectively, compared to the amount of interest that would have been incurred in such period based on the rates of interest in effect at December 31, 2019 and taking into consideration the interest rate swaps. For additional information regarding our Credit Agreement, see Note 16 Long-term Debt and Credit Agreements of the notes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Commodity Price Risk
While we are exposed to commodity price risk, we pass through abnormal changes in component and raw material costs to our customers based on the contractual terms of our arrangements. In limited situations, we may not be fully compensated for such changes in costs.
 
 
57

 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
 
 
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 
 
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Garrett Motion Inc. 
 
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Garrett Motion Inc. and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the related consolidated and combined statement of operations, comprehensive income, equity (deficit), and cash flows, for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2019, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). We also have audited the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2019, in conformity with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also, in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle 
As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, using the modified retrospective approach.
Emphasis of a Matter 
As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, on October 1, 2018, the Company became an independent publicly-traded company through a pro rata distribution by Honeywell International Inc. (“Honeywell”) of 100% of the then-outstanding shares of the Company to Honeywell’s stockholders. For the period from January 1, 2018 to October 1, 2018, the financial statements include expense allocations for certain corporate functions historically provided by Honeywell. These allocations may not be reflective of the actual expense that would have been incurred had the Company operated as a separate entity apart from Honeywell. A summary of transactions with related parties is included in Note 3 to the financial statements.
Basis for Opinions 
The Company’s management is responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements and an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. 
Our audits of the financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures to respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control 
58

 
based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. 
 
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Critical Audit Matter 
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current-period audit of the financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Contingent Obligation Associated with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement
Critical Audit Matter Description
As described in Note 23 to the financial statements, the Company recorded an obligation payable to Honeywell as a result of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement (the “Agreement”) entered into in connection with the spin-off from Honeywell on October 1, 2018. The Agreement requires that the Company reimburse Honeywell for 90% of the asbestos related liabilities and accounts payable related to the Bendix friction materials business. In accordance with ASC 450 – Contingencies and ASC 460 – Guarantees, the Company recorded an obligation at the aggregate of the fair value of the stand-ready indemnification obligation, and its estimate of the actual losses incurred to date. In 2019, Garrett initiated a lawsuit against Honeywell, disputing the enforceability of the Agreement.
The carrying value of the obligation payable under the Agreement as of December 31, 2019 is $1,090 million. The actual amount to be paid under the Agreement is subject to both the future claim settlements entered into by Honeywell, and the outcome of the ongoing litigation with Honeywell.
We have identified the Company’s measurement of the obligation payable under the Agreement as a critical audit matter. This required a high degree of auditor judgment and an increased extent of effort when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s judgments as to the sufficiency of evidence obtained from Honeywell to support an adjustment to the carrying value of the obligation payable. 
How the Critical Audit Matter was Addressed in the Audit
The primary procedures we performed to address this critical audit matter included the following:




 

•

We tested the effectiveness of certain internal controls over the Company’s litigation assessment process, including internal controls over the assessment of the Company’s pending litigation with Honeywell. 




 

•

We reviewed management’s evaluation of the accounting impact of the pending litigation with Honeywell and made inquiries of internal counsel regarding the matter.
59

 




 

•

We tested the effectiveness of certain internal controls over the Company’s evaluation of all reasonably available information related to the indemnifiable incurred losses under the Agreement as of December 31, 2019.




 

•

We obtained an evaluation of future projected payables directly from Honeywell and evaluated the Company’s assessment of such information for purposes of estimating the carrying value of the obligation payable under the Agreement as of December 31, 2019. With the assistance of our actuarial subject matter specialists, we: 




 

o

Reviewed and tested management's process in arriving at the value of the obligation payable under the Agreement. 




 

o

Tested the calculations used by management to translate the actuarial and other information received into the year-end value.




 

o

Performed a retrospective analysis of the prior year’s estimate to assess the reliability of the estimate of the obligation payable.
 
 
 
/s/ DELOITTE SA 
 
Geneva, Switzerland
February 27, 2020 
 
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2018.

60

 
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Garrett Motion Inc. 
 
Opinion on the Financial Statements 
We have audited the accompanying combined statements of operations and comprehensive income of Garrett Motion Inc. (formerly the Transportation Systems Business of Honeywell International, Inc.) and subsidiaries (the “Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2017, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the results of its operations for the year ended December 31, 2017, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. 
Basis for Opinion 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audit, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. 
Our audit included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audit also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion. 
Emphasis of a Matter 
As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the accompanying financial statements have been derived from the separate records maintained by Honeywell International Inc. The financial statements also include expense allocations for certain corporate functions historically provided by Honeywell International Inc. These allocations may not be reflective of the actual expense that would have been incurred had the Company operated as a separate entity apart from Honeywell International Inc. A summary of transactions with related parties is included in Note 3 to the financial statements. 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP 
Parsippany, New Jersey 
May 1, 2018 (June 8, 2018 as to the effect of adoption of ASU 2017-07; August 7, 2018 as to the effects of the restatement to the 2017 financial statements; March 1, 2019 as to the effects of the change in sales concentration presentation) 
We began serving as the Company’s auditor in 2018. In 2018 we became the predecessor auditor. 
 
61

 
GARRETT MOTION INC. 
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)

 



Net sales (Note 4)

 

$

3,248

 

 

$

3,375

 

 

$

3,096

 



Cost of goods sold

 

 

2,537

 

 

 

2,599

 

 

 

2,361

 



Gross profit

 

 

711

 

 

 

776

 

 

 

735

 



Selling, general and administrative expenses

 

 

249

 

 

 

249

 

 

 

249

 



Other expense, net (Note 5)

 

 

40

 

 

 

120

 

 

 

130

 



Interest expense

 

 

68

 

 

 

19

 

 

 

8

 



Non-operating expense (income) (Note 6)

 

 

8

 

 

 

(8

)

 

 

(18

)



Income before taxes

 

 

346

 

 

 

396

 

 

 

366

 



Tax expense (benefit) (Note 7)

 

 

33

 

 

 

(810

)

 

 

1,349

 



Net income (loss)

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Earnings (losses) per common share

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Basic

 

$

4.20

 

 

$

16.28

 

 

$

(13.27

)



Diluted

 

$

4.12

 

 

$

16.21

 

 

$

(13.27

)



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Weighted average common shares outstanding

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Basic

 

 

74,602,868

 

 

 

74,059,240

 

 

 

74,070,852

 



Diluted

 

 

75,934,373

 

 

 

74,402,148

 

 

 

74,070,852

 


 
 
The Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
 
 
62

 
GARRETT MOTION INC. 
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Net income (loss) 

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)



Foreign exchange translation adjustment

 

 

67

 

 

 

(198

)

 

 

72

 



Defined benefit pension plan adjustment, net of tax (Note 24)

 

 

(14

)

 

 

(2

)

 

 

—

 



Changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges, net of tax
(Note 18)

 

 

4

 

 

 

35

 

 

 

(77

)



Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax

 

 

57

 

 

 

(165

)

 

 

(5

)



Comprehensive income (loss) 

 

$

370

 

 

$

1,041

 

 

$

(988

)


 
The Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
 
 
63

 
GARRETT MOTION INC. 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



ASSETS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current assets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Cash and cash equivalents

 

$

187

 

 

$

196

 



Accounts, notes and other receivables, net (Note 9)

 

 

707

 

 

 

750

 



Inventories, net (Note 11)

 

 

220

 

 

 

172

 



Other current assets

 

 

85

 

 

 

61

 



Total current assets

 

 

1,199

 

 

 

1,179

 



Investments and long-term receivables

 

 

36

 

 

 

39

 



Property, plant and equipment, net (Note 13)

 

 

471

 

 

 

438

 



Goodwill (Note 14)

 

 

193

 

 

 

193

 



Deferred income taxes (Note 7)

 

 

268

 

 

 

183

 



Other assets (Note 12)

 

 

108

 

 

 

92

 



Total assets

 

$

2,275

 

 

$

2,124

 



LIABILITIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current liabilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Accounts payable

 

$

1,009

 

 

$

916

 



Current maturities of long-term debt (Note 16)

 

 

4

 

 

 

23

 



Obligations payable to Honeywell, current (Note 23)

 

 

69

 

 

 

127

 



Accrued liabilities (Note 15)

 

 

310

 

 

 

374

 



Total current liabilities

 

 

1,392

 

 

 

1,440

 



Long-term debt (Note 16)

 

 

1,409

 

 

 

1,569

 



Deferred income taxes (Note 7)

 

 

51

 

 

 

13

 



Obligations payable to Honeywell (Note 23)

 

 

1,282

 

 

 

1,399

 



Asbestos-related liabilities (Note 23)

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 



Other liabilities (Note 19)

 

 

274

 

 

 

219

 



Total liabilities

 

$

4,408

 

 

$

4,641

 



COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES (Note 23)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



EQUITY (DEFICIT)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Common stock, par value $0.001; 400,000,000 shares authorized, 74,911,139
and 74,070,852 issued and 74,826,329 and 74,019,825 outstanding as of
December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 respectively

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Additional paid-in capital

 

 

19

 

 

 

5

 



Retained earnings

 

 

(2,282

)

 

 

(2,595

)



Accumulated other comprehensive income (Note 20)

 

 

130

 

 

 

73

 



Total equity (deficit)

 

 

(2,133

)

 

 

(2,517

)



Total liabilities and equity (deficit)

 

$

2,275

 

 

$

2,124

 


 
The Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
 
 
64

 
GARRETT MOTION INC. 
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



Cash flows from operating activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net income (loss)

 

 

313

 

 

 

1,206

 

 

 

(983

)



Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by
operating activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Deferred income taxes

 

 

(41

)

 

 

(931

)

 

 

973

 



Depreciation

 

 

73

 

 

 

72

 

 

 

64

 



Amortization of deferred issuance costs

 

 

9

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

—

 



Foreign exchange (gain) loss

 

 

19

 

 

 

15

 

 

 

(24

)



Stock compensation expense

 

 

18

 

 

 

21

 

 

 

15

 



Pension expense

 

 

18

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

9

 



Other

 

 

19

 

 

 

37

 

 

 

(2

)



Changes in assets and liabilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Accounts, notes and other receivables

 

 

32

 

 

 

(30

)

 

 

(42

)



Receivables from related parties

 

 

—

 

 

 

57

 

 

 

—

 



Inventories

 

 

(60

)

 

 

2

 

 

 

(46

)



Other assets

 

 

(22

)

 

 

(46

)

 

 

1

 



Accounts payable

 

 

87

 

 

 

63

 

 

 

88

 



Payables to related parties

 

 

—

 

 

 

(50

)

 

 

32

 



Accrued liabilities

 

 

(60

)

 

 

49

 

 

 

41

 



Obligations payable to Honeywell

 

 

(143

)

 

 

(76

)

 

 

—

 



Asbestos-related liabilities

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1

)

 

 

(69

)



Other liabilities

 

 

(20

)

 

 

(27

)

 

 

14

 



Net cash provided by operating activities

 

 

242

 

 

 

373

 

 

 

71

 



Cash flows from investing activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Expenditures for property, plant and equipment

 

 

(102

)

 

 

(95

)

 

 

(103

)



Proceeds from related party notes receivables

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

66

 



Increase in marketable securities

 

 

—

 

 

 

(21

)

 

 

(651

)



Decrease in marketable securities

 

 

—

 

 

 

312

 

 

 

712

 



Other

 

 

16

 

 

 

(4

)

 

 

6

 



Net cash (used for) provided by investing activities

 

 

(86

)

 

 

192

 

 

 

30

 



Cash flows from financing activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net increase in Invested deficit

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1,493

)

 

 

(19

)



Proceeds from revolving credit facilities

 

 

745

 

 

 

331

 

 

 

—

 



Payments of revolving credit facilities

 

 

(745

)

 

 

(331

)

 

 

—

 



Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt

 

 

—

 

 

 

1,631

 

 

 

—

 



Payments of long-term debt

 

 

(163

)

 

 

(6

)

 

 

—

 



Proceeds for related party notes payable

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

671

 



Payments related to related party notes payable

 

 

—

 

 

 

(493

)

 

 

(670

)



Net change to cash pooling and short-term notes

 

 

—

 

 

 

(300

)

 

 

78

 



Other

 

 

—

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

—

 



Net cash (used for) provided by financing activities

 

 

(163

)

 

 

(658

)

 

 

60

 



Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(11

)

 

 

20

 



Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents

 

 

(9

)

 

 

(104

)

 

 

181

 



Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period

 

 

196

 

 

 

300

 

 

 

119

 



Cash and cash equivalents at end of period

 

$

187

 

 

$

196

 

 

$

300

 



Supplemental cash flow disclosures:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Income taxes paid (net of refunds)

 

$

93

 

 

$

76

 

 

$

430

 



Interest expense paid

 

$

54

 

 

$

12

 

 

$

5

 



Supplemental schedule of non-cash investing and financing activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Expenditures for property, plant and equipment in accounts payable

 

$

51

 

 

$

43

 

 

$

42

 


 
The Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
 
 
65

 
GARRETT MOTION INC. 
CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY (DEFICIT)
 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accumulated

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

Additional

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Common Stock

 

 

Paid-in

 

 

Retained

 

 

Invested

 

 

Comprehensive

 

 

Total

 



 

 

Shares

 

 

Amount

 

 

Capital

 

 

Earnings

 

 

Deficit

 

 

Income/(Loss)

 

 

Deficit

 



 

 

(in millions)

 



Balance at December 31, 2016

 

 

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

 

(1,464

)

 

 

243

 

 

 

(1,221

)



Net loss

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(983

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(983

)



Other comprehensive income, net of tax

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(5

)

 

 

(5

)



Change in Invested deficit

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

14

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

14

 



Balance at December 31, 2017

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(2,433

)

 

 

238

 

 

 

(2,195

)



Net income through September 30,
2018

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

1,137

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

1,137

 



Net income from October 1, 2018

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

69

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

69

 



Other comprehensive income, net of tax

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(165

)

 

 

(165

)



Change in Invested deficit

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1,168

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1,168

)



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(200

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(200

)



Issuance of common stock and
reclassification of invested deficit

 

 

74

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(2,664

)

 

 

2,664

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Stock-based compensation

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

5

 



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

 

74

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

(2,595

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

73

 

 

 

(2,517

)



Net income

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

313

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

313

 



Other comprehensive income, net of tax

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

57

 

 

 

57

 



Stock-based compensation

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

18

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

18

 



Tax withholding related to vesting
of restricted stock units and other

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(4

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(4

)



Balance at December 31, 2019

 

 

75

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

19

 

 

$

(2,282

)

 

$

—

 

 

$

130

 

 

$

(2,133

)


 
The Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are an integral part of this statement.
 
 
66

 
GARRETT MOTION INC.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED AND COMBINED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
Note 1. Organization, Operations and Basis of Presentation
Background
Garrett Motion Inc. (the “Company” or “Garrett”) designs, manufactures and sells highly engineered turbocharger and electric-boosting technologies for light and commercial vehicle original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and the aftermarket. We are a global technology leader with significant expertise in delivering products across gasoline and diesel propulsion systems and hybrid and fuel cell powertrains.
On October 1, 2018, the Company became an independent publicly-traded company through a pro rata distribution by Honeywell International Inc. (“Former Parent” or “Honeywell”) of 100% of the then-outstanding shares of Garrett to Honeywell’s stockholders (the “Spin-Off”). Each Honeywell stockholder of record received one share of Garrett common stock for every 10 shares of Honeywell common stock held on the record date. Approximately 74 million shares of Garrett common stock were distributed on October 1, 2018 to Honeywell stockholders. In connection with the Spin-Off, Garrett´s common stock began trading “regular-way” under the ticker symbol “GTX” on the New York Stock Exchange on October 1, 2018.
The Spin-Off was completed pursuant to a Separation and Distribution Agreement and other agreements with Honeywell related to the Spin-Off, including but not limited to an indemnification and reimbursement agreement (the “Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement”) and a tax matters agreement (the “Tax Matters Agreement”). Refer to Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies for additional details related to the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement and Tax Matters Agreement.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Garrett,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and “the Company” refer to (i) Honeywell’s Transportation Systems Business (the “Transportation Systems Business” or the “Business”) prior to the Spin-Off and (ii) Garrett Motion Inc. and its subsidiaries following the Spin-Off, as applicable.
Basis of Presentation
Prior to the Spin-Off on October 1, 2018, our historical financial statements were prepared on a stand-alone combined basis and were derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Honeywell. Accordingly, for periods prior to October 1, 2018, our financial statements are presented on a combined basis and for the periods subsequent to October 1, 2018 are presented on a consolidated basis (collectively, the historical financial statements for all periods presented are referred to as “Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements”). The Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). All amounts presented are in millions, except per share amounts.
Asbestos-related expenses, net of probable insurance recoveries, are presented within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. Honeywell is subject to certain asbestos-related and environmental-related liabilities, primarily related to its legacy Bendix business. In conjunction with the Spin-Off, certain operations that were part of the Bendix business, along with the ownership of the Bendix trademark, as well as certain operations that were part of other legacy elements of the Business, were transferred to us. For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, these Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. However, this recognition model differs from the recognition model applied subsequent to the Spin-Off, with the difference recognized through equity as of the Spin-Off date. In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement. We are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. For additional information, see Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies.
67

 
We evaluated segment reporting in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 280, Segment Reporting. We concluded that Garrett operates in a single operating segment and a single reportable segment based on the operating results available and evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) to make decisions about resource allocation and performance assessment. The CODM makes operational performance assessments and resource allocation decisions on a consolidated basis, inclusive of all of the Business’s products.
All intracompany transactions have been eliminated. As described in Note 3 Related Party Transactions with Honeywell, all significant transactions between the Business and Honeywell prior to the Spin-Off have been included in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements and settled for cash prior to the Spin-Off with the exception of certain related party notes which were forgiven. These transactions which were settled for cash prior to the Spin-Off were reflected in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets as Due from related parties or Due to related parties for the periods prior to the Spin-Off. In the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows, the cash flows related to related party notes receivables presented in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets in Due from related parties are reflected as investing activities since these balances represent amounts loaned to Former Parent. The cash flows related to related party notes payables previously presented in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets in Due to related parties are reflected as financing activities since these balances represent amounts financed by Former Parent. Following the Spin-Off, Honeywell is no longer considered a related party.
Honeywell used a centralized approach to cash management and financing of its operations. For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, the majority of the Business’s cash was transferred to Honeywell daily and Honeywell funded its operating and investing activities as needed. This arrangement is not reflective of the manner in which the Business would have been able to finance its operations had it been a stand-alone business separate from Honeywell during the periods presented prior to the Spin-Off. Cash transfers to and from Honeywell’s cash management accounts are reflected in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheet as Due to and Due from related parties, current and in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows as net financing activities.
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include certain assets and liabilities that have historically been held at the Honeywell corporate level but are specifically identifiable or otherwise attributable to Garrett. The cash and cash equivalents held by Honeywell at the corporate level are not specifically identifiable to Garrett and therefore were not attributed for any of the periods presented. Honeywell third-party debt and the related interest expense have not been allocated for any of the periods presented as Honeywell’s borrowings were not directly attributable to Garrett.
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, Honeywell provided certain services, such as legal, accounting, information technology, human resources and other infrastructure support, on behalf of the Business. The cost of these services has been allocated to the Business on the basis of the proportion of revenues. We consider these allocations to be a reasonable reflection of the benefits received by the Business. However, the financial information presented in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements may not reflect the consolidated and combined financial position, operating results and cash flows of the Business had the Business been a separate stand-alone entity during the periods presented. Actual costs that would have been incurred if the Business had been a stand-alone company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure and strategic decisions made in various areas, including information technology and infrastructure. We consider the basis on which the expenses have been allocated to be a reasonable reflection of the utilization of services provided to or the benefits received by the Business during the periods presented.
Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we identified errors in our income tax accounts for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018. The errors included an overstatement of current and deferred tax liability balances that were recorded in connection with the Spin-Off from Honeywell and an overstatement of income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2018. As a result, we have revised our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018 contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In correcting the errors, we decreased our income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 by $26 million and adjusted certain balance sheet tax accounts by $76 million, $50 million representing Spin-Off related adjustments recorded through retained earnings. We evaluated the materiality of the errors quantitatively and qualitatively and concluded they were not material to our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018. Refer to Note 8 for additional information.
68

 
Subsequent Event
Subsequent to December 31, 2019, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency.  We operate two facilities in China, including a manufacturing facility in Wuhan. The Chinese government ordered our Wuhan facility to halt operations beginning on January 23, 2020 and our facility in Shanghai has been operating at partial capacity during the same period, which has disrupted our production schedules. The resulting shortage of components produced by our Chinese facilities is expected to lead to lower shipments from the cancellation of new orders as well as lower volumes from existing orders.  There can be no assurances as to when our Wuhan facility will reopen or when our Shanghai facility will resume operating at full capacity. Moreover, because of the current restrictions on travel in China, we may continue to have labor shortages even when our Wuhan facility re-opens, which may force us to continue to reduce operations.  In addition, we have a significant supplier base in China affected by the outbreak, and the reduction in parts supply will affect our plants in Europe and North America. The combined effects of the closure of our plant in Wuhan, the reduced operations of our facility in Shanghai and the impact of the novel coronavirus on our suppliers may have a significant adverse impact on our revenues and profitability at least through the second quarter of  2020.
 
Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Combination— For the periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include the accounts of Garrett Motion Inc. and all of its subsidiaries in which a controlling financial interest is maintained. We consolidate entities that we control due to ownership of a majority voting interest, and we consolidate variable interest entities (“VIEs”) when we have variable interests and are the primary beneficiary. Our consolidation policy requires equity investments that we exercise significant influence over but in which we do not have a controlling financial interest to be accounted for using the equity method. Investments through which we are not able to exercise significant influence over the investee and which we do not have readily determinable fair values are accounted for under the cost method. All intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated in consolidation.
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements were prepared on a stand-alone basis and include our business units and wholly owned direct and indirect subsidiaries and entities in which we had a controlling financial interest.
Cash and Cash Equivalents—Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand and highly liquid investments having an original maturity of three months or less.
Trade Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts—Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount as a result of transactions with customers. Garrett maintains allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses as a result of a customer’s inability to make required payments. Garrett estimates anticipated losses from doubtful accounts based on days past due as measured from the contractual due date and collection history. Garrett also takes into consideration changes in economic conditions that may not be reflected in historical trends (for example, customers in bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization). Receivables are written-off against the allowance for doubtful accounts when they are determined uncollectible. Such determination includes analysis and consideration of the particular conditions of the account, including time intervals since last collection, customer performance against agreed upon payment plans, solvency of customer and any bankruptcy proceedings.
Transfer of Financial Instruments—Sales and transfers of financial instruments are accounted for under ASC 860, Transfers and Servicing (“ASC 860”). The Company may discount and sell accounts receivables during the normal course of business. These receivables which are transferred to a third party without recourse to the Company and that meet the criteria of sales accounting as per ASC 860, are excluded from the amounts reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The cash proceeds received from such sales are included in operating cash flows. The expenses associated with the factoring of receivables are recorded within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations.
The Company may also receive bank notes in settlement of accounts receivables, primarily in the Asia Pacific region. Such bank notes are classified as notes receivables under Accounts, notes and other receivables – net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The collections of such bank notes are included in operating cash flows and any expenses related to discounting these are included within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. The Company can hold the bank notes until maturity, exchange them with suppliers to settle liabilities, or sell them to third party financial institutions in exchange for cash. 
69

 
Inventories—Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis, including direct material costs and direct and indirect manufacturing costs, or net realizable value. Obsolete inventory is identified based on analysis of inventory for known obsolescence issues. The original equipment inventory on hand in excess of forecasted usage and lack of consumption in the previous 12 months is fully reserved, unless the value of such material is recoverable from either the vendor or the customer. 
Property, Plant and Equipment—Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. For financial reporting, the straight-line method of depreciation is used over the estimated useful lives of 10 to 50 years for buildings and improvements, 2 to 16 years for machinery and equipment, 3 to 10 years for tooling equipment and 5 to 7 years for software.
Leases—For the periods beginning January 1, 2019, right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of a lease (the “commencement date”) based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in Other assets, Accrued liabilities, and Other liabilities in our Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets. No finance leases have been recognized. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. We use the implicit rate when readily determinable. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease where it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Variable lease payments are expensed in the period in which they occur. We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are generally accounted for separately. For machinery and equipment, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. We account for short-term leases by recognizing lease payments in net income on a straight-line basis over the lease term and will not recognize any ROU assets and lease liabilities on the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheet. For the periods prior to January 1, 2019, we accounted for leases in accordance with ASC 840, Leases (“ASC 840”).
Goodwill—Goodwill is subject to impairment testing annually, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable. This testing compares carrying value to fair value of our single reporting unit. The Company recognizes an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit´s fair value. However, any impairment should not exceed the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. Because we have a single reporting unit with a negative carrying value, no impairment was recognized.
Warranties and Guarantees—Expected warranty costs for products sold are recognized based on an estimate of the amount that eventually will be required to settle such obligations. These accruals are based on factors such as past experience, length of the warranty and various other considerations. Costs of product recalls, which may include the cost of the product being replaced as well as the customer’s cost of the recall, including labor to remove and replace the recalled part, are accrued as part of our warranty accrual at the time an obligation becomes probable and can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are adjusted from time to time based on facts and circumstances that impact the status of existing claims. For additional information, see Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies.
Sales Recognition—On January 1, 2018, we adopted the FASB´s updated guidance on revenue from contracts with customers, ASC 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective method applied to contracts that were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting.
Product sales are recognized when we transfer control of the promised goods to our customer, which is based on shipping terms. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods. 
In the sale of products in the OEM channel, the transaction price for these goods is equal to the agreed price of each unit and represents the standalone selling price for the unit. 
70

 
In the sale of products in the aftermarket channel, the terms of a contract or the historical business practice can give rise to variable consideration due to, but not limited to, discounts and bonuses. We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount we will receive from customers and reduce revenues recognized accordingly. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. 
Prior to January 1, 2018, sales were recognized when there was evidence of a sales agreement, the delivery of goods had occurred, the sales price was fixed or determinable and the collectability of revenue was reasonably assured. Sales were generally recorded upon shipment of product to customers and transfer of title under standard commercial terms. Sales incentives and allowances were recognized as a reduction to revenue at the time of the related sale. In addition, payments made to customers were generally recognized as a reduction to revenue at the time these payments are made or committed to the customers.
Research and Development—Garrett conducts research and development (“R&D”) activities, which consist primarily of the development of new products and product applications. R&D costs are charged to expense as incurred. Such costs are included in Cost of goods sold of $129 million, $128 million and $119 million, for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 respectively. Additionally, the Company incurs engineering-related expenses which are also included in Cost of goods sold of $5 million, $10 million and $19 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
Asbestos-Related Contingencies and Insurance Recoveries—Honeywell is subject to certain asbestos-related and environmental-related liabilities, primarily related to its legacy Bendix business. In conjunction with the Spin-Off, certain operations that were part of the Bendix business, along with the ownership of the Bendix trademark, as well as certain operations that were part of other legacy elements of the Business, were transferred to us. For periods prior to the Spin-Off, we reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. We recognized a liability for any asbestos-related contingency that was probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. In connection with the recognition of liabilities for asbestos-related matters, we recorded asbestos-related insurance recoveries that are deemed probable. Asbestos-related expenses, net of probable insurance recoveries, are presented within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. Net charges for asbestos-related and environmental-related matters in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement are presented within Other expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. 
We are currently engaged in litigation against Honeywell in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. For additional information, see Note 23, Commitments and Contingencies.
Stock-Based Compensation Plans—The principal awards issued under our stock-based compensation plans, which are described in Note 21, Stock-Based Compensation, are restricted stock units. The cost for such awards is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service periods (generally the vesting period of the equity award) and is included in Selling, general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant to recognize expense for those awards that are expected to vest and are based on our historical forfeiture rates under our Former Parent´s plans.
71

 
For periods prior to the Spin-Off, certain employees within the Business participated in stock-based compensation plans sponsored by the Former Parent. The Former Parent’s stock-based compensation plans primarily include incentive compensation plans. Awards granted under the plans consist of stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance stock units (“PSUs”) and are based on the Former Parent’s common shares and, as such, are reflected in Invested deficit within the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Equity (Deficit).
Pension Benefits—Following the Spin-Off, we sponsor defined benefit pension plans covering certain employees, primarily in Switzerland, the U.S. and Ireland. For such plans, we are required to disaggregate the service cost component of net benefit costs and report those costs in the same line item or items in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the pertinent employees during the period. The other nonservice components of net benefit costs are required to be presented separately from the service cost component. We record the service cost component of Pension ongoing (income) expense in Cost of goods sold or Selling, general and administrative expenses. The remaining components of net benefit costs within Pension ongoing (income) expense, primarily interest costs and assumed return on plan assets, are recorded in Non-operating expense (income). We recognize net actuarial gains or losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the fair value of plan assets or the plans’ projected benefit obligation (the corridor) annually in the fourth quarter each year (“MTM Adjustment”). The MTM Adjustment is recorded in Non-operating expense (income).
For periods prior to the Spin-Off, we sponsored a defined benefit pension plan covering certain employees in Ireland. Additionally, certain Garrett employees participated in defined benefit pension plans (the “Shared Plans”) sponsored by Honeywell which includes participants of other Honeywell subsidiaries and operations. We accounted for our participation in the Shared Plans as a multiemployer benefit plan. Accordingly, we did not record an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of the Shared Plans. The related pension expense was based on annual service cost of active Garrett participants and reported within Cost of goods sold in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. The pension expense specifically identified for the active Garrett participants in the Shared Plans for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $5 million and $7 million , respectively.
Foreign Currency Translation—Assets and liabilities of subsidiaries operating outside the United States with a functional currency other than U.S. Dollars are translated into U.S. Dollars using year-end exchange rates. Sales, costs and expenses are translated at the average exchange rates in effect during the year. Foreign currency translation gains and losses are included as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Derivative Financial Instruments—We minimize our risks from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations through our normal operating and financing activities and, when deemed appropriate through the use of derivative financial instruments. Derivative financial instruments are used to manage risk and are not used for trading or other speculative purposes. Derivative financial instruments that qualify for hedge accounting must be designated and effective as a hedge of the identified risk exposure at the inception of the contract. Accordingly, changes in fair value of the derivative contract must be highly correlated with changes in fair value of the underlying hedged item at inception of the hedge and over the life of the hedge contract.
All derivatives are recorded on the balance sheet as assets or liabilities and measured at fair value. For derivatives designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the changes in fair value of the derivatives are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged items impact earnings. Cash flows of such derivative financial instruments are classified consistent with the underlying hedged item.
On September 27, 2018, we early adopted the new accounting guidance contained in ASU 2017-12 on a modified retrospective approach. The new standard is intended to improve and simplify rules relating to hedge accounting, including the elimination of periodic hedge ineffectiveness, recognition of components excluded from hedge effectiveness assessment, the ability to elect to perform subsequent effectiveness assessments qualitatively, and other provisions designed to provide more transparency around the economics of a company’s hedging strategy.
72

 
Income Taxes—We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method which requires us to recognize current tax liabilities or receivables for the amount of taxes we estimate are payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and their respective tax bases of assets and liabilities and the expected benefits of net operating loss and credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period enacted. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income and the reversal of deferred tax liabilities during the period in which related temporary differences become deductible. 
Prior to the Spin-Off, the tax provision was presented on a separate company basis as if we were a separate filer. The effects of tax adjustments and settlements from taxing authorities are presented in our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements in the period to which they relate as if we were a separate filer. Our current obligations for taxes were settled with our Former Parent on an estimated basis and adjusted in later periods as appropriate. All income taxes due to or due from our Former Parent that have not been settled or recovered by the end of the period are reflected in Invested deficit within the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. We are subject to income tax in the United States (federal, state and local) as well as other jurisdictions in which we operate. The tax provision was calculated as if the Business  was operating on a stand-alone basis and filed separate tax returns in the jurisdiction in which it operates. Therefore, cash tax payments and items of current and deferred taxes may not be reflective of the actual tax balances prior to or subsequent to the Spin-Off.
Earnings per share—Basic earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted earnings per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding and all dilutive potential common shares outstanding. On October 1, 2018, the date of consummation of the Spin-Off, 74,070,852 shares of the Company’s Common Stock were distributed to Honeywell stockholders of record as of September 18, 2018 who held their shares through the Distribution Date. Basic and diluted EPS for all periods prior to the Spin-Off reflect the number of distributed shares, or 74,070,852 shares. For 2018, the distributed shares were treated as issued and outstanding from January 1, 2018 for purposes of calculating historical basic earnings per share. Basic and diluted weighted average of common shares outstanding for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 were 74,602,868 and 75,934,373, 74,059,240 and 74,402,148, and 74,070,852 and 74,070,852, respectively.
Use of Estimates—The preparation of the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements and related disclosures in the accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Estimates and assumptions are periodically reviewed and the effects of changes are reflected in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements in the period they are determined to be necessary.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
 
In February 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-02, Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, which allows for an entity to elect to reclassify stranded tax effects within Accumulated other comprehensive income, resulting from U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“U.S. tax reform”), to retained earnings. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. The guidance allows for adoption (i) at the beginning of the period of adoption or (ii) retrospective to each period in which the income tax effects of the U.S. tax reform related to items recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive income are recognized. Upon adoption, the Company did not elect to reclassify the stranded income tax effects of the U.S. tax reform from accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings.
 
73

 
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 and subsequent amendments, collectively known as ASC 842 Leases, which requires lessees to recognize most leases on their balance sheets for the rights and obligations created by those leases. The guidance requires enhanced disclosures regarding the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases that will be effective for periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new lease accounting standard using the modified retrospective transition option of applying the new standard at the adoption date while electing not to recast comparative periods in the transition. In addition, the Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to carry forward the historical lease classification. In adopting the new leases standard, the Company has applied the practical expedients as per ASC 842-10-65-1(f) and (g). Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of additional lease assets and lease liabilities of $34 million as of January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact related to existing leases and as a result, a cumulative-effect adjustment was not recorded. 
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which amends certain disclosure requirements related to fair value measures. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact on its disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-14, Compensation-Retirement Benefits Defined Benefit Plans – General (Subtopic 715-20), which amends certain disclosure requirements related to the defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact on its disclosures.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments—Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. The initial adoption impact will be recognized as a cumulative-effect adjustment to opening retained earnings as of January 1, 2020. 
 
Note 3. Related Party Transactions with Honeywell 
Subsequent to Spin-Off
Following the Spin-Off, Honeywell is no longer considered a related party. 
We have Obligations payable to Honeywell related to the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement and Tax Matters Agreement. See Note 23 Commitments and Contingencies for further details.
Prior to Spin-Off
The Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for periods prior to the Spin-Off have been prepared on a stand-alone basis and are derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Honeywell. 
Prior to the Spin-Off, Honeywell provided certain services, such as legal, accounting, information technology, human resources and other infrastructure support, on behalf of the Business. The cost of these services has been allocated to the Business on the basis of the proportion of revenues. We consider the allocations to be a reasonable reflection of the benefits received by the Business. During the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, Garrett was allocated $87 million and $127 million, respectively, of general corporate expenses incurred by Honeywell, and such amounts are included within Selling, general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. As certain expenses reflected in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include allocations of corporate expenses from Honeywell, these statements could differ from those that would have been prepared had Garrett operated on a stand-alone basis. 
74

 
Honeywell used a centralized approach for the purpose of cash management and financing of its operations. Prior to the Spin-Off, the Business’ cash was historically transferred to Honeywell daily, and Honeywell funded its operating and investing activities as needed. Honeywell had operated a centralized non-interest-bearing cash pool in the U.S. and regional interest-bearing cash pools outside of the U.S. As of December 31, 2017, the Company had non-interest-bearing cash pooling balances of $51 million which are presented in Invested deficit within the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets. 
The Company received interest income for related party notes receivables of $1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. Additionally, the Company incurred interest expense for related party notes payable of $1 million and $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Honeywell centrally hedged its exposure to changes in foreign exchange rates principally with forward contracts. Certain contracts were specifically designated to and entered on behalf of the Business with the Former Parent as a counterparty and were used to hedge known or probable anticipated foreign currency sales and purchases. The Business designated these hedges as cash flow hedges. These hedges were marked-to-market with the effective portion of the changes in fair value of the derivatives recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged items impact earnings. See Note 18, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures for further information of these financial instruments, and Note 6, Non-Operating (Income) Expense and Note 20, Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), for their net impact.
Net transfers to and from Honeywell are included within Invested deficit on the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets. The components of the net transfers to and from Honeywell prior to the Spin-Off, for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 are as follows: 
 




 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



General financing activities

 

$

1,774

 

 

$

(363

)



Distribution to Former Parent

 

 

(2,994

)

 

 

(97

)



Unbilled corporate allocations

 

 

41

 

 

 

70

 



Stock compensation expense and other compensation awards

 

 

17

 

 

 

19

 



Pension expense

 

 

7

 

 

 

9

 



Mandatory Transition Tax

 

 

(13

)

 

 

354

 



Other Income Tax

 

 

—

 

 

 

22

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

(200

)

 

 

—

 



Issuance of common stock and reclassification of invested deficit

 

 

2,664

 

 

 

—

 



Total net decrease (increase) in Invested deficit

 

$

1,296

 

 

$

14

 


 
Note 4. Revenue Recognition and Contracts with Customers
The Company generates revenue through the sale of products to customers in the OEM and aftermarket channels. OEM and aftermarket contracts generally include scheduling agreements that stipulate the pricing and delivery terms that identify the quantity and timing of the product to be transferred. 
Revenue recognition under ASC 606 is generally consistent with the previous standard, with the exception of how we account for payments made to customers in conjunction with future business. Historically these payments were recognized as a reduction of revenue at the time the payments were made. Under ASC 606, these payments result in deferred reductions to revenue that are subsequently recognized when the products are delivered to the customer. The Company evaluates the amounts capitalized each period end for recoverability and expenses any amounts that are no longer expected to be recovered over the term of the business arrangement. These payments are recorded in Other current assets and Other assets in our Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets.  
75

 
Disaggregated Revenue 
For Net sales by region (determined based on country of shipment) and channel, refer to Note 26, Concentrations.
We recognize virtually all of our revenues arising from performance obligations at a point in time. Less than 1% of our revenue is satisfied over time. 
Contract Balances 
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in unbilled receivables (contract assets) and billed accounts receivable, reported in Accounts, notes and other receivables – net, and customer advances and deposits (contract liabilities), reported in Accrued Liabilities, on the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets. Contract assets arise when the timing of cash collected from customers differs from the timing of revenue recognition. Contract assets are recognized when the revenue associated with the contract is recognized prior to billing and derecognized once invoiced in accordance with the terms of the contract. Contract liabilities are recorded in scenarios where we enter into arrangements where customers are contractually obligated to remit cash payments in advance of us satisfying performance obligations and recognizing revenue. Contract liabilities are generally derecognized when revenue is recognized. 
These assets and liabilities are reported on the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period. 
The following table summarizes our contract assets and liabilities balances: 
 




 

 

2019

 



Contract assets—January 1

 

$

5

 



Contract assets—December 31

 

 

6

 



Change in contract assets—Increase/(Decrease)

 

 

1

 



Contract liabilities—January 1

 

$

(2

)



Contract liabilities—December 31

 

 

(3

)



Change in contract liabilities—(Increase)/Decrease

 

$

(1

)


 
Performance Obligations 
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. For product sales, typically each product sold to a customer represents a distinct performance obligation. 
Virtually all of our performance obligations are satisfied as of a point in time. Performance obligations are supported by contracts with customers, providing a framework for the nature of the distinct goods, services or bundle of goods and services. The timing of satisfying the performance obligation is typically indicated by the terms of the contract. All performance obligations are expected to be satisfied within one year, with substantially all performance obligations being satisfied within a month. 
The timing of satisfaction of our performance obligations does not significantly vary from the typical timing of payment, with cash advances (contract liabilities) and unbilled receivables (contract assets) being settled within 3 months. For some contracts, we may be entitled to receive an advance payment. 
We have applied the practical expedient to not disclose the value of remaining performance obligations for contracts with an original expected term of one year or less. 
76

 
Note 5. Other Expense, Net
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Indemnification related — post Spin-Off

 

$

28

 

 

$

(16

)

 

$

—

 



Indemnification related — litigation

 

$

11

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 



Asbestos related, net of probable insurance
recoveries

 

 

—

 

 

 

131

 

 

 

132

 



Environmental remediation, non-active sites

 

 

—

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

(2

)



Factoring and notes receivables discount fees

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



 

 

$

40

 

 

$

120

 

 

$

130

 


 
Note 6. Non-Operating Expense (Income)
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Equity income of affiliated companies

 

$

(6

)

 

$

(5

)

 

$

(4

)



Interest income

 

 

(7

)

 

 

(7

)

 

 

(14

)



Pension expense (income) —non service

 

 

8

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

(1

)



Foreign exchange

 

 

13

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

—

 



Others, net

 

 

—

 

 

 

(4

)

 

 

1

 



 

 

$

8

 

 

$

(8

)

 

$

(18

)


 
Note 7. Income Taxes
The sources of income (loss) from continuing operations, before income taxes, classified between domestic entities and those entities domiciled outside of the U.S., are as follows:
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



Income before taxes

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Domestic entities

 

$

(54

)

 

$

(99

)

 

$

(105

)



Entities outside the U.S.

 

 

400

 

 

 

495

 

 

 

471

 



 

 

$

346

 

 

$

396

 

 

$

366

 


 
Tax expense (benefit)
Tax expense (benefit) consists of:
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Current:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Federal

 

$

9

 

 

$

7

 

 

$

311

 



State

 

 

1

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

(2

)



Foreign

 

 

64

 

 

 

113

 

 

 

67

 



 

 

$

74

 

 

$

121

 

 

$

376

 



Deferred:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Federal

 

 

2

 

 

 

(8

)

 

 

3

 



State

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

6

 



Foreign

 

 

(43

)

 

 

(923

)

 

 

964

 



 

 

$

(41

)

 

$

(931

)

 

$

973

 



 

 

$

33

 

 

$

(810

)

 

$

1,349

 


 
The U.S. federal statutory income tax rate is reconciled to our effective income tax rate as follows:
77

 
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



U.S. federal statutory income tax rate

 

 

21.0

%

 

 

21.0

%

 

 

35.0

%



Taxes on non-U.S. earnings different from U.S. tax

 

 

(2.3

)%

 

 

(7.7

)%

 

 

(28.0

)%



Reserves for tax contingencies

 

 

2.5

%

 

 

4.1

%

 

 

(14.3

)%



Non-deductible expenses

 

 

1.7

%

 

 

6.0

%

 

 

11.6

%



Withholding and other taxes on foreign earnings

 

 

4.4

%

 

 

(231.6

)%

 

 

—

 



Tax law changes

 

 

(17.3

)%

 

 

—

 

 

 

364.7

%



Changes in valuation allowance

 

 

0.5

%

 

 

5.3

%

 

 

—

 



All other items

 

 

(1.0

)%

 

 

(1.6

)%

 

 

(0.4

)%



 

 

 

9.5

%

 

 

(204.5

)%

 

 

368.6

%


 
The effective tax rate increased by 214.0 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to the absence of approximately $910 million of non-recurring tax benefits in 2018 because of a reduction in withholding taxes incurred as part of an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business in advance of the Spin-Off. The increase was partially offset by approximately $60 million of tax benefits related to the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities for tax law changes enacted during the year, primarily in Switzerland. 
 
78

 
The effective tax rate decreased by 573.1 percentage points in 2018 compared to 2017. The decrease was primarily attributable to the absence of approximately $1,335 million of expense related to U.S. tax reform incurred during 2017 and approximately $910 million tax benefits from a reduction of withholding taxes incurred as part of an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business in advance of the Spin-Off. The impacts of U.S. tax reform during 2017 primarily consisted of a tax charge of $354 million related to the imposition of the one-time mandatory transition tax on the Company’s undistributed foreign earnings (refer to Note 23 for amounts payable to Honeywell) and a $980 million tax charge because of a change in the Company’s intent to no longer permanently reinvest its undistributed foreign earnings outside the U.S. The $980 million tax charge primarily consisted of withholding taxes on future distributions which were subsequently reduced to approximately $50 million during 2018 primarily in connection with an internal restructuring.   
 
Deferred tax assets (liabilities)
The tax effects of temporary differences and tax carryforwards which give rise to future income tax benefits and payables are as follows:
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Deferred tax assets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Intangibles and fixed assets

 

$

205

 

 

$

165

 



Pension

 

 

12

 

 

$

6

 



Accruals and reserves

 

 

30

 

 

 

33

 



Net operating losses and other tax attribute carryforwards

 

 

27

 

 

 

26

 



Outside basis differences

 

 

17

 

 

 

7

 



Other

 

 

23

 

 

 

13

 



Total Deferred tax assets

 

 

314

 

 

 

250

 



Valuation allowance

 

 

(27

)

 

 

(24

)



Net deferred tax assets

 

$

287

 

 

$

226

 



Deferred tax liabilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Outside basis differences

 

$

(49

)

 

$

(50

)



Other

 

 

(21

)

 

 

(6

)



Total deferred tax liabilities

 

 

(70

)

 

 

(56

)



Net deferred tax asset/(liability)

 

$

217

 

 

$

170

 


 
 
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $85 million in various jurisdictions.  The majority of the net operating losses have an indefinite carryforward.  
 
We maintain a valuation allowance of $27 million against a portion of the non-U.S. total deferred tax assets. In the event we determine that we will not be able to realize our net deferred tax assets in the future, we will reduce such amounts through an increase to tax expense in the period such determination is made. Conversely, if we determine that we will be able to realize net deferred tax assets in excess of the carrying amounts, we will decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a reduction to tax expense in the period that such determination is made. Our balance sheets present a deferred tax asset of $268 million and a deferred tax liability of $51 million after taking into account jurisdictional netting. 
 
The Company does not intend to permanently reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries and has recorded a deferred tax liability mainly consisting of withholding taxes of approximately $49 million as of December 31, 2019.
 
79

 
The following table summarizes the activity related to the Company’s uncertain tax positions (excluding interest and penalties and related tax attributes):
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Change in unrecognized tax benefits:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Balance at beginning of year

 

$

48

 

 

$

100

 

 

$

152

 



Gross increases related to current period tax
positions

 

 

8

 

 

 

19

 

 

 

11

 



Gross increases related to prior periods tax
positions

 

 

—

 

 

 

9

 

 

 

1

 



Gross decreases related to prior periods tax
positions

 

 

—

 

 

 

(8

)

 

 

(64

)



Decrease related to resolutions of audits with tax
authorities

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(2

)



Expiration of the statute of limitations for the
assessment of taxes

 

 

(2

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Potential Indemnifications to Honeywell for US
and foreign taxes as contractually obligated in
connection with Tax Matters Agreement

 

 

—

 

 

 

(71

)

 

 

—

 



Foreign currency translation

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1

)

 

 

2

 



Balance at end of year

 

$

54

 

 

$

48

 

 

$

100

 


 
As of December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017 there were $54 million, $48 million, and $100 million, respectively, of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would be recorded as a component of Tax expense.
 
Estimated interest and penalties related to uncertain tax benefits are classified as a component of tax expense in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations and totaled $3 million of expense, $2 million of income, and $6 million of income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017, respectively. Accrued interest and penalties were $26 million, $23 million, and $35 million, as of December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017, respectively. 
 
We are currently under audit in a few jurisdictions for tax years ranging from 2006 through 2017.  Based on the outcome of these examinations, or as a result of the expiration of statutes of limitations for specific jurisdictions, it is reasonably possible that certain unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions taken on previously filed tax returns will materially change from those recorded as liabilities in our financial statements. 
    
 
 
Note 8. Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we identified errors in our income tax accounts for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018.  The errors included an overstatement of current and deferred tax liability balances that were recorded in connection with the Spin-Off from Honeywell and an overstatement  of income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2018.  As a result, we have revised our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018 contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In correcting the errors, we decreased our income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 by $26 million and adjusted certain balance sheet tax accounts by $76 million, $50 million representing Spin-Off related adjustments recorded through retained earnings. We have evaluated the materiality of the impact of these items both quantitatively and qualitatively and concluded the errors were not material to our previously issued Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018. 
80

 
The following tables identify each financial statement line item affected by the revision for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018.  
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Previously
Reported

 

 

Adjustment

 

 

As Revised

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement
of Operation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Tax benefit

 

 

(784

)

 

 

(26

)

 

 

(810

)



Net income

 

$

1,180

 

 

$

26

 

 

$

1,206

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Earnings (losses) per common share

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Basic

 

$

15.93

 

 

$

0.35

 

 

$

16.28

 



Diluted

 

$

15.86

 

 

$

0.35

 

 

$

16.21

 


 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Previously
Reported

 

 

Adjustment

 

 

As Revised

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement of
Comprehensive Income

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net income

 

$

1,180

 

 

$

26

 

 

$

1,206

 



Comprehensive income

 

$

1,015

 

 

$

26

 

 

$

1,041

 


 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Previously
Reported

 

 

Adjustment

 

 

As Revised

 



Consolidated Balance Sheet

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Assets

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Other current assets

 

$

71

 

 

$

(10

)

 

$

61

 



Total current assets

 

 

1,189

 

 

 

(10

)

 

 

1,179

 



Deferred income taxes

 

 

165

 

 

 

18

 

 

 

183

 



Other assets

 

 

80

 

 

 

12

 

 

 

92

 



Total assets

 

$

2,104

 

 

$

20

 

 

$

2,124

 



Liabilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Accrued liabilities

 

$

426

 

 

$

(52

)

 

$

374

 



Total current liabilities

 

 

1,492

 

 

 

(52

)

 

 

1,440

 



Deferred income taxes

 

 

27

 

 

 

(14

)

 

 

13

 



Other liabilities

 

 

209

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

219

 



Total liabilities

 

$

4,697

 

 

$

(56

)

 

$

4,641

 



Equity

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Retained earnings

 

 

(2,671

)

 

 

76

 

 

 

(2,595

)



Total stockholders´ deficit

 

 

(2,593

)

 

 

76

 

 

 

(2,517

)



Total liabilities and stockholders´ deficit

 

$

2,104

 

 

$

20

 

 

$

2,124

 


 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Previously
Reported

 

 

Adjustment

 

 

As Revised

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement of
Cash Flows

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Cash flows from operating activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net income

 

$

1,180

 

 

$

26

 

 

$

1,206

 



Adjustments to reconcile net income to net
cash provided by operating activities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Deferred income taxes

 

 

(905

)

 

 

(26

)

 

 

(931

)



Net cash provided by operating activities

 

$

373

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

373

 


81

 
 




 

 

Previously Reported

 



 

 

Retained
Earnings

 

 

Invested
Deficit

 

 

Total
Deficit

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement of
Equity (Deficit)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net (loss) income from October 1, 2018

 

$

43

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

43

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

(250

)

 

 

(250

)



Issuance of common stock and reclassification
of invested deficit

 

 

(2,714

)

 

 

2,714

 

 

 

—

 



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

$

(2,671

)

 

$

—

 

 

$

(2,593

)


 




 

 

Adjustment

 



 

 

Retained
Earnings

 

 

Invested
Deficit

 

 

Total
Deficit

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement of
Equity (Deficit)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net (loss) income from October 1, 2018

 

$

26

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

26

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

50

 

 

 

50

 



Issuance of common stock and reclassification
of invested deficit

 

 

50

 

 

 

(50

)

 

 

—

 



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

$

76

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

76

 


 




 

 

As Revised

 



 

 

Retained
Earnings

 

 

Invested
Deficit

 

 

Total
Deficit

 



Consolidated and Combined Statement of
Equity (Deficit)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net (loss) income from October 1, 2018

 

$

69

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

69

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

(200

)

 

 

(200

)



Issuance of common stock and reclassification
of invested deficit

 

 

(2,664

)

 

 

2,664

 

 

 

—

 



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

$

(2,595

)

 

$

—

 

 

$

(2,517

)


 
Note 9. Accounts, Notes and Other Receivables—Net 
 




 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

December 31,
2018

 



Trade receivables

 

$

574

 

 

$

593

 



Notes receivables

 

 

68

 

 

 

93

 



Other receivables

 

 

69

 

 

 

67

 



 

 

$

711

 

 

$

753

 



Less—Allowance for doubtful accounts

 

 

(4

)

 

 

(3

)



 

 

$

707

 

 

$

750

 


 
Trade receivables include $4 million and $5 million of unbilled balances as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.  
 
Note 10. Factoring and Notes Receivables
 
The Company entered into arrangements with financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company sold $27 million of eligible receivables, without recourse, and accounted for these arrangements as a true sale. There were no factoring arrangements for the year ended December 31, 2018. 
 
82

 
The Company also received guaranteed bank notes without recourse, in settlement of accounts receivables, primarily in the Asia Pacific region. The Company can hold the bank notes until maturity, exchange them with suppliers to settle liabilities, or sell them to third party financial institutions in exchange for cash. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company sold $105 million of bank notes, without recourse, and accounted for these as true sales.   There were no bank notes discounted for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Note 11. Inventories—Net 
 




 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

December 31,
2018

 



Raw materials

 

$

142

 

 

$

112

 



Work in process

 

 

18

 

 

 

19

 



Finished products

 

 

85

 

 

 

64

 



 

 

$

245

 

 

$

195

 



Less—Reserves

 

 

(25

)

 

 

(23

)



 

 

$

220

 

 

$

172

 


 
 
 
Note 12. Other Assets
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Advanced discounts to customers, non-current

 

$

62

 

 

$

56

 



Operating right-of-use assets (Note 17)

 

 

35

 

 

 

—

 



Undesignated cross-currency swap at fair value

 

 

—

 

 

 

16

 



Other

 

 

11

 

 

 

20

 



 

 

$

108

 

 

$

92

 


 
 
Note 13. Property, Plant and Equipment—Net
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Machinery and equipment

 

$

639

 

 

$

623

 



Tooling

 

 

324

 

 

 

306

 



Buildings and improvements

 

 

141

 

 

 

136

 



Construction in progress

 

 

100

 

 

 

57

 



Software

 

 

57

 

 

 

54

 



Land and improvements

 

 

16

 

 

 

16

 



Others

 

 

24

 

 

 

24

 



 

 

 

1,301

 

 

 

1,216

 



Less—Accumulated depreciation and amortization

 

 

(830

)

 

 

(778

)



 

 

$

471

 

 

$

438

 


 
Depreciation and amortization expense was $73 million, $72 million and $64 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Note 14. Goodwill
The change in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
 




 

 

December 31,
2018

 

 

Currency
Translation
Adjustment

 

 

December 31,
2019

 



Goodwill

 

$

193

 

 

 

—

 

 

$

193

 


83

 
 
Note 15. Accrued Liabilities 
 




 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

December 31,
2018

 



Customer pricing reserve

 

$

90

 

 

$

107

 



Compensation, benefit and other employee related

 

 

64

 

 

 

71

 



Repositioning

 

 

4

 

 

 

15

 



Product warranties and performance guarantees

 

 

29

 

 

 

32

 



Taxes

 

 

33

 

 

 

61

 



Advanced discounts from suppliers, current

 

 

19

 

 

 

17

 



Customer advances and deferred income

 

 

12

 

 

 

14

 



Accrued interest

 

 

5

 

 

 

6

 



Short-term lease liability (Note 17)

 

 

8

 

 

 

—

 



Other (primarily operating expenses)

 

 

46

 

 

 

51

 



 

 

$

310

 

 

$

374

 


 
 
 
The Company accrued repositioning costs related to projects to optimize our product costs and to right-size our organizational structure. Expenses related to the repositioning accruals are included in Cost of goods sold in our Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations.
 




 

 

Severance
Costs

 

 

Exit
Costs

 

 

Total

 



Balance at December 31, 2017

 

$

53

 

 

$

7

 

 

$

60

 



Charges

 

 

2

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

2

 



Usage—cash

 

 

(42

)

 

 

(5

)

 

 

(47

)



Foreign currency translation

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

 

13

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

15

 



Charges

 

 

2

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

2

 



Usage—cash

 

 

(8

)

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(10

)



Adjustments

 

 

(3

)

 

 

1

 

 

 

(2

)



Foreign currency translation

 

 

(1

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1

)



Balance at December 31, 2019

 

$

3

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

4

 


 
Note 16. Long-term Debt and Credit Agreements
The principal amounts outstanding on long-term debt and the revolving credit facility are as follows:
 




 

 

December 31,
2019

 



Term Loan A

 

$

283

 



Term Loan B

 

 

764

 



Senior Notes

 

 

393

 



 

 

 

1,440

 



Less: current portion

 

 

(4

)



 

 

$

1,436

 


 
On September 27, 2018, we entered into a Credit Agreement, by and among us, Garrett LX I S.à r.l., Garrett LX II S.à r.l. (“Lux Guarantor”), Garrett LX III S.à r.l. (“Lux Borrower”), Garrett Borrowing LLC (in such capacity, the “US Co-Borrower”), and Honeywell Technologies Sàrl (“Swiss Borrower” and, together with Lux Borrower and US Co-Borrower, the “Borrowers”), the lenders and issuing banks party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Credit Agreement”).
84

 
The Credit Agreement provides for senior secured financing of approximately the Euro equivalent of $1,254 million, consisting of (i) a seven-year senior secured first-lien term B loan facility, which consists of a tranche denominated in Euro of €375 million and a tranche denominated in U.S. Dollars of $425 million (the “Term B Facility”), (ii) five-year senior secured first-lien term A loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of €330 million (the “Term A Facility” and, together with the Term B Facility, the “Term Loan Facilities”) and (iii) a five-year senior secured first-lien revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of €430 million with revolving loans to Swiss Borrower, to be made available in a number of currencies including Australian Dollars, Euros, Pounds Sterling, Swiss Francs, U.S. Dollars and Yen (the “Revolving Facility” and, together with the Term Loan Facilities, the “Senior Credit Facilities”). Each of the Revolving Facility and the Term A Facility matures five years after the effective date of the Credit Agreement, in each case with certain extension rights in the discretion of each lender. The Term B Facility matures seven years after the effective date of the Credit Agreement, with certain extension rights in the discretion of each lender.
The Senior Credit Facilities are subject to an interest rate, at our option, of either (a) base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate” in the United States, (2) the greater of the federal funds effective rate and the overnight bank funding rate, plus 0.5% and (3) the one month adjusted LIBOR rate, plus 1% per annum (“ABR”), (b) an adjusted LIBOR rate (“LIBOR”) (which shall not be less than zero), or (c) an adjusted EURIBOR rate (“EURIBOR”) (which shall not be less than zero), in each case, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin for the U.S. Dollar tranche of the Term B Facility is currently 2.50% per annum (for LIBOR loans) and 1.50% per annum (for ABR loans) while that for the Euro tranche of the Term B Facility is currently 2.75% per annum (for EURIBOR loans). The applicable margin for each of the Term A Facility and the Revolving Credit Facility varies based on our leverage ratio. Accordingly, the interest rates for the Senior Credit Facilities will fluctuate during the term of the Credit Agreement based on changes in the ABR, LIBOR, EURIBOR or future changes in our leverage ratio. Interest payments with respect to the Term Loan Facilities are required either on a quarterly basis (for ABR loans) or at the end of each interest period (for LIBOR and EURIBOR loans) or, if the duration of the applicable interest period exceeds three months, then every three months.
We are obligated to make quarterly principal payments throughout the term of the Term Loan Facilities according to the amortization provisions in the Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are prepayable at our option without premium or penalty. We may request to extend the maturity date of all or a portion of the Senior Credit Facilities subject to certain conditions customary for financings of this type. The Credit Agreement also contains certain mandatory prepayment provisions in the event that we incur certain types of indebtedness or receive net cash proceeds from certain non-ordinary course asset sales or other dispositions of property, in each case subject to terms and conditions customary for financings of this type.
On May 23, 2019, the Company made a prepayment of the Euro-equivalent of $14 million related to the mandatory amortizations of its Term Loan A Facility due in the third and fourth quarters of 2019. On September 27, 2019, the Company made a prepayment of the Euro-equivalent of $41 million related to the mandatory amortizations of its Term Loan A Facility due through the first half of 2021. On December 27, 2019, the Company made a prepayment of the Euro-equivalent of $23 million related to the mandatory amortizations of its Term Loan A Facility due through the end of 2021.
On December 27, 2019, the Company made a principal repayment of the Euro-equivalent of $76 million on the Euro denominated Term Loan B Facility.
The schedule of principal payments on long-term debt is as follows:
 




 

 

December 31,
2019

 



2020

 

$

4

 



2021

 

 

4

 



2022

 

 

64

 



2023

 

 

227

 



2024

 

 

4

 



Thereafter

 

 

1,137

 



 

 

$

1,440

 



Less: current portion

 

 

(4

)



 

 

$

1,436

 


 
85

 
 
The Credit Agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants customary for financings of this type that, among other things, limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness or liens, to dispose of assets, to make certain fundamental changes, to enter into restrictive agreements, to make certain investments, loans, advances, guarantees and acquisitions, to prepay certain indebtedness and to pay dividends, to make other distributions or redemptions/ repurchases, in respect of the our and our subsidiaries’ equity interests, to engage in transactions with affiliates, amend certain material documents or to permit the International Financial Reporting Standards equity amount of Lux Borrower to decrease below a certain amount. The Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants requiring the maintenance of a consolidated total leverage ratio of not greater than 4.00 to 1.00 (with  step downs to (i) 3.75 to 1.00 in September 2020 and (ii) 3.50 to 1.00 in September 2021), and a consolidated interest coverage ratio of not less than 2.75 to 1.00. We are in compliance with our financial covenants as of December 31, 2019.
On September 27, 2018, we completed the offering of €350 million (approximately $400 million) in aggregate principal amount of 5.125% senior notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”). The Senior Notes bear interest at a fixed annual interest rate of 5.125% and mature on October 15, 2026. 
The Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated September 27, 2018 (the “Indenture”), which, among other things and subject to certain limitations and exceptions, limits our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur, assume or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain disqualified equity interests and preferred shares, (ii) pay dividends or distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, capital stock and make other restricted payments, (iii) make investments, (iv) consummate certain asset sales or transfers, (v) engage in certain transactions with affiliates, (vi) grant or assume certain liens on assets to secure debt unless the Senior Notes are secured equally and ratably (vii) restrict dividends and other payments by certain of their subsidiaries and (vii) consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our or our restricted subsidiaries’ assets.
All debt issuance costs, except for those associated to the Revolving Credit Facility, are deferred and recognized as a direct deduction to the related debt liability and are amortized to interest expense over the debt term. The company paid approximately $37 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the Term A Facility, Term B Facility, and Senior Notes. 
The unutilized portion of the Revolving Credit Facility is subject to an annual commitment fee of 0.40% to 0.50% depending on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio. Debt issuance costs associated with the Revolving Credit Facility were capitalized in Other assets and are amortized to interest expense over the debt term. Approximately, $6 million of debt issuance costs were paid in connection with the Revolving Credit Facility.
Note 17. Leases 
We have operating leases that primarily consist of real estate, machinery and equipment. Our leases have remaining lease terms of up to 11 years, some of which include options to extend the leases for up to two years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases within the year. 
The components of lease expense are as follows:
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



Operating lease cost

 

$

14

 


 
Rent expense under ASC 840, was $14 million and $10 million in 2018 and 2017, respectively.
86

 
Supplemental cash flow information related to operating leases is as follows:
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease
liabilities:

 

 

 

 



Operating cash outflows from operating leases

 

$

12

 



Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for lease obligations:

 

 

 

 



Operating leases

 

$

12

 


 
Supplemental balance sheet information related to operating leases is as follows:
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



Other assets

 

$

35

 



Accrued liabilities

 

 

8

 



Other liabilities

 

 

28

 


 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



Weighted-average lease term (in years)

 

 

6.30

 



Weighted-average discount rate

 

6.36

 


 
Maturities of operating lease liabilities were as follows:
 




 

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



2020

 

$

9

 



2021

 

 

7

 



2022

 

 

6

 



2023

 

 

5

 



2024

 

 

5

 



Thereafter

 

 

12

 



Total lease payments

 

 

44

 



Less imputed interest

 

 

(8

)



 

 

$

36

 


 
 
Note 18. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures 
Credit and Market Risk—We continually monitor the creditworthiness of our customers to which we grant credit terms in the normal course of business. The terms and conditions of our credit sales are designed to mitigate or eliminate concentrations of credit risk with any single customer.
Foreign Currency Risk Management—We are exposed to market risks from changes in currency exchange rates. These exposures may impact future earnings and/or operating cash flows. Our exposure to market risk for changes in foreign currency exchange rates arises from international financing activities between subsidiaries, foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities and transactions arising from international trade. 
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, as part of Honeywell´s centralized treasury function, the primary objective was to preserve the U.S. Dollar value of foreign currency denominated cash flows and earnings. We hedged major exposures to foreign currency denominated cash flows to mitigate the effects of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates on earnings. We designated the related hedging instruments as cash flow hedges, except in cases where the hedged item was recognized on balance sheet. The gain or loss from a derivative financial instrument designated as a cash flow hedge was classified in the same line of the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations as the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item.
87

 
The historical treasury strategies implemented by Honeywell’s centralized treasury function differ from our treasury strategy as a standalone company, which is described below.
We hedge currency exposures with natural offsets to the fullest extent possible and, once these opportunities have been exhausted, through foreign currency exchange forward contracts (foreign currency exchange contracts). We hedge monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies. Prior to conversion into U.S. dollars, these assets and liabilities are remeasured at spot exchange rates in effect on the balance sheet date. The effects of changes in spot rates are recognized in earnings and included in Non-operating (income) expense. 
At December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we had contracts with aggregate gross notional amounts of $1,820 million and $838 million, respectively, to limit interest rate risk and to exchange foreign currencies, principally the U.S. Dollar, Swiss Franc, British Pound, Euro, Chinese Yuan, Japanese Yen, Mexican Peso, New Romanian Leu, Czech Koruna, Australian Dollar and Korean Won.  
Fair Value of Financial Instruments—The FASB’s accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price).Financial and nonfinancial assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The following table sets forth the Company’s financial assets and liabilities that were accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018: 
 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fair Value

 

 



 

 

Notional Amounts

 

 

Assets

 

 

 

Liabilities

 

 



 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

December 31,
2018

 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

December 31,
2018

 

 

 

December 31,
2019

 

 

 

December 31,
2018

 

 



Designated forward currency exchange
contracts

 

$

392

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

5

 

 

$

—

 

(a)

 

$

1

 

 

 

$

—

 

(b)



Undesignated instruments:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Undesignated cross-currency swap

 

 

420

 

 

 

425

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

16

 

(c)

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

—

 

 



Undesignated interest rate swap

 

 

561

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

—

 

(d)



Undesignated forward currency
exchange contracts

 

 

447

 

 

 

413

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

4

 

(a)

 

 

3

 

(c)

 

 

1

 

(b)



 

 

 

1,428

 

 

 

838

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

20

 

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

 

1

 

 



 

 

$

1,820

 

 

$

838

 

 

$

7

 

 

$

20

 

 

 

$

6

 

 

 

$

1

 

 


 




(a)

Recorded within Other current assets in the Company’s Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets




(b)

Recorded within Accrued liabilities in the Company’s Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets 




(c)

Recorded within Other assets in the Company’s Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets




(d)

Recorded within Other liabilities in the Company´s Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets
On June 7, 2019, the Company entered into interest rate swap contracts to limit its exposure to interest rate risk by converting the interest payments on variable rate debt to fixed rate payments. These interest rate swaps have not been designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes. 
The Company initiated a cash flow hedging program in the first quarter of 2019 and has since then entered into forward currency exchange contracts to mitigate exposure to foreign currency exchange rate volatility and the associated impact on earnings related to forecasted foreign currency commitments. These forward currency exchange contracts are assessed as highly effective and are designated as cash flow hedges. Gains and losses on derivatives qualifying as cash flow hedges are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until the underlying transactions are recognized in earnings.
88

 
On September 27, 2018, the Company entered into a floating-floating cross-currency swap contract to hedge the foreign currency exposure from foreign currency-denominated debt which will mature on September 27, 2025. The gain or loss on this derivative instrument is recognized in earnings and included in Non-operating expense (income). For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, gains recorded in Non-operating expense (income), under the cross-currency swap contract were $1 million and $16 million, respectively.  In May 2019, Garrett re-couponed the cross-currency swap contract with its counterparties and received a cash settlement of $19 million.           
The foreign currency exchange, interest rate swap and cross-currency swap contracts are valued using market observable inputs. As such, these derivative instruments are classified within Level 2. The assumptions used in measuring fair value of the cross-currency swap are considered level 2 inputs, which are based upon market observable interest rate curves, cross currency basis curves, credit default swap curves, and foreign exchange rates. 
The carrying value of Cash and cash equivalents, Account receivables, Notes and Other receivables, and Account payables contained in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets approximates fair value. 
The following table sets forth the Company’s financial assets and liabilities that were not carried at fair value:
 




 

 

December 31, 2019

 



 

 

Carrying Value

 

 

Fair Value

 



Long-term debt and related current maturities

 

$

1,413

 

 

$

1,448

 


 
 
The Company determined the fair value of certain of its long-term debt and related current maturities utilizing transactions in the listed markets for similar liabilities. As such, the fair value of the long-term debt and related current maturities is considered level 2.
Note 19. Other Liabilities
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Pension and other employee related

 

$

94

 

 

$

71

 



Advanced discounts from suppliers

 

 

46

 

 

 

63

 



Income taxes

 

 

79

 

 

 

69

 



Long-term lease liability (Note 16)

 

 

28

 

 

 

—

 



Other

 

 

27

 

 

 

16

 



 

 

$

274

 

 

$

219

 


 
89

 
Note 20. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The changes in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) are provided in the tables below:
 




 

 

Pre-Tax

 

 

Tax

 

 

After-Tax

 



Year Ended December 31, 2017

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Foreign exchange translation adjustment

 

$

72

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

72

 



Pension adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges

 

 

(84

)

 

 

7

 

 

 

(77

)



 

 

$

(12

)

 

$

7

 

 

$

(5

)



Year Ended December 31, 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Foreign exchange translation adjustment

 

$

(198

)

 

$

—

 

 

$

(198

)



Pension adjustments

 

 

(2

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(2

)



Changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges

 

 

37

 

 

 

(2

)

 

 

35

 



 

 

$

(163

)

 

$

(2

)

 

$

(165

)



Year Ended December 31, 2019

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Foreign exchange translation adjustment

 

$

59

 

 

$

8

 

 

$

67

 



Pension adjustments

 

 

(18

)

 

 

4

 

 

 

(14

)



Changes in fair value of effective cash flow hedges

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

4

 



 

 

$

43

 

 

$

14

 

 

$

57

 


 
Changes in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) by Component
 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total

 



 

 

Foreign

 

 

Changes in Fair

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accumulated

 



 

 

Exchange

 

 

Value of

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other

 



 

 

Translation

 

 

Effective Cash

 

 

Pension

 

 

Comprehensive

 



 

 

Adjustment

 

 

Flow Hedges

 

 

Adjustments

 

 

Income (Loss)

 



Balance at December 31, 2017

 

$

284

 

 

$

(35

)

 

$

(11

)

 

$

238

 



Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications

 

 

(198

)

 

 

12

 

 

 

(5

)

 

 

(191

)



Amounts reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss)

 

 

—

 

 

 

23

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

26

 



Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)

 

 

(198

)

 

 

35

 

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(165

)



Balance at December 31, 2018

 

$

86

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

(13

)

 

$

73

 



Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications

 

 

67

 

 

 

27

 

 

 

(27

)

 

 

67

 



Amounts reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income

 

 

—

 

 

 

(23

)

 

 

13

 

 

 

(10

)



Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)

 

 

67

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

(14

)

 

 

57

 



Balance at December 31, 2019

 

$

153

 

 

$

4

 

 

$

(27

)

 

$

130

 


 
90

 
Reclassifications Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 




Year ended December 31, 2019

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Affected Line in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Selling,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost of

 

 

General and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Net

 

 

Goods

 

 

Administrative

 

 

Non-Operating (Income)

 



 

 

Sales

 

 

Sold

 

 

Expenses

 

 

Expense

 

 

Total

 



Amortization of Pension and Other Postretirement
Items:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Actuarial losses recognized

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

13

 

 

$

13

 



Losses (gains) on cash flow hedges

 

 

—

 

 

 

(25

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(25

)



Tax expense (benefit)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

2

 



Total reclassifications for the period, net of tax

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

$

(10

)


 




Year ended December 31, 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Affected Line in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Selling,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost of

 

 

General and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Net

 

 

Goods

 

 

Administrative

 

 

Non-Operating (Income)

 



 

 

Sales

 

 

Sold

 

 

Expenses

 

 

Expense

 

 

Total

 



Amortization of Pension and Other Postretirement
Items:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Actuarial losses recognized

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

3

 

 

$

3

 



Losses (gains) on cash flow hedges

 

 

(1

)

 

 

26

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

25

 



Tax expense (benefit)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2

)



Total reclassifications for the period, net of tax

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

$

26

 


 
 
Note 21. Stock-Based Compensation 
On September 14, 2018, our Board adopted, and Honeywell, as our sole stockholder, approved, the 2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates (the “Stock Incentive Plan”) and the 2018 Stock Plan for Non-Employee Directors (the “Director Equity Plan”). The Stock Incentive Plan provides for the grant of stock options, stock appreciation rights, performance awards, restricted stock units, restricted stock, other stock-based awards, and cash-based awards to employees of Garrett or its affiliates, and independent contractors or consultants of Garrett. The maximum aggregate number of shares of our common stock that may be issued under the Stock Incentive Plan is 10,000,000 shares and, for the Director Equity Plan, 400,000 shares. Up to 5,000,000 shares may be granted as incentive stock options under the Stock Incentive Plan.
As of December 31, 2019, there were 5,508,176 and 344,860 shares of our common stock available for future issuance under the Stock Incentive Plan and Director Equity Plan, respectively.
Restricted Stock Units —Restricted stock unit (“RSU”) awards are issued to certain key employees and directors at fair market value at the date of grant. RSUs typically vest over a period of three or four years, and when vested, each unit entitles the holder to one share of our common stock.          
91

 
The following table summarizes information about RSU activity related to our Stock Incentive Plan and Director Equity Plan for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 




 

 

Number of
Restricted
Stock Units

 

 

Weighted
Average Grant
Date Fair Value
Per Share

 



Non-vested at October 1, 2018

 

 

2,848,541

 

 

$

8.70

 



Granted

 

 

530,840

 

 

 

17.76

 



Vested

 

 

(4,452

)

 

 

6.67

 



Forfeited

 

 

(5,307

)

 

 

14.16

 



Non-vested at December 31, 2018

 

 

3,369,622

 

 

$

10.12

 



Granted

 

 

629,037

 

 

 

15.36

 



Vested

 

 

(967,518

)

 

 

5.26

 



Forfeited

 

 

(236,501

)

 

 

14.47

 



Non-vested at December 31, 2019

 

 

2,794,640

 

 

$

12.62

 


 
As of December 31, 2019, there was approximately $17 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested RSUs granted under our Stock Incentive Plan, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.2 years.
The following table summarizes information about the income statement impact from RSUs for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 




Compensation expense

 

$

15

 



 

 

 

 

 


 
Stock Options — The exercise price, term and other conditions applicable to each option granted under our stock incentive plans are generally determined by the Compensation Committee of the Board. The exercise price of stock options is set on the grant date and may not be less than the fair market value per share of our stock on that date. The fair value is recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). Options generally vest over a period four years and expire after ten years.
The following table summarizes information about the income statement impact from stock options for the year ended December 31, 2019.  There were no stock options granted prior to 2019.
 




Compensation expense

 

$

1

 



 

 

 

 

 


 
The fair value related to stock options granted was determined using Black-Scholes option pricing model and the weighted average assumptions are shown in the table below:
 




Key Black-Scholes Assumptions

 

Year Ended December 31, 2019

 



Risk-free interest rate

 

2.6%

 



Expected term (years)

 

 

6.25

 



Volatility

 

42.08%

 



Dividend yield

 

0.0%

 



Fair value per stock option

 

 

7.28

 


 
The fair value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Volatility is determined based on the historical volatility of peer companies over a period corresponding to the expected term. Expected term is determined using a simplified approach, calculated as the midpoint between the vesting period and the contractual term of the award. The risk-free interest rate is determined based upon the yield of an outstanding U.S. Treasury note with a term equal to the expected term of the option granted.
 
92

 
The following table summarizes information about stock option activity related to the Stock Incentive Plan for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 




 

 

Number of
Stock Options

 

 

Weighted
Average
Exercise Price
(per share)

 

 

Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Term (years)

 

 

Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
(in thousands)

 



Outstanding as of December 31, 2018

 

 

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Granted

 

 

483,408

 

 

 

16.17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Exercised

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Forfeited

 

 

(34,375

)

 

 

16.17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Expired

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Outstanding as of December 31, 2019

 

 

449,033

 

 

 

16.17

 

 

 

9.26

 

 

 

—

 



Exercisable as of December 31, 2019

 

 

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 


 
The weighted average grant date fair value of options granted in 2019 was $16.17.  No options were exercised during the year ended December 31, 2019.  As of December 31, 2019, there was no intrinsic value for the outstanding and exercisable shares under options. 
 
As of December 31, 2019, there was $2 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to stock options that is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of approximately 3.2 years.
 
Performance Stock Units — The Company has issued PSUs to certain of its officers which, upon vesting, entitles the holder to shares of our common stock. The actual number of shares an employee receives for each PSU depends on the Company’s performance against various measures related to organic revenue growth, adjusted EBITDA and leveraged cash flows over a three-year period. Each grantee is granted a target level of PSUs and may earn between 0% and 200% of the target level depending on the Company’s performance against the financial goals.
 
The following table summarizes information about PSU activity related to the Stock Incentive Plan for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 




 

 

Number of
Performance
Stock Units

 

 

Weighted
Average Grant
Date Fair Value
Per Share

 



Non-vested at December 31, 2018

 

 

—

 

 

$

—

 



Granted

 

 

379,090

 

 

 

16.17

 



Vested

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Forfeited

 

 

(47,769

)

 

 

16.17

 



Non-vested at December 31, 2019

 

 

331,321

 

 

$

16.17

 


 
The fair value of the PSUs is based on the fair market value of the Company’s stock at the grant date. The number of underlying shares to be issued will be based on actual performance achievement over the performance period. The per unit weighted average fair value at the date of grant for PSUs granted during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.17. The fair value of each PSU grant is amortized monthly into compensation expense on a graded vesting (accelerated) basis over a vesting period of 36 months. The accrual of compensation costs is based on our estimate of the final expected value of the award and is adjusted as required for the performance-based condition. The Company estimates forfeitures at time of issuance, which results in a reduction in compensation expense. As the payout of PSUs includes dividend equivalents, no separate dividend yield assumption is required in calculating the fair value of the PSUs. The Company currently does not pay dividends.
 
As of December 31, 2019, there was approximately $4 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested PSUs granted under the Stock Incentive Plan which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2 years.
 
93

 
The following table summarizes information about the income statement impact from PSUs for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no PSUs granted prior to 2019.
 




Compensation expense

 

$

2

 



 

 

 

 

 


 
Stock Based Awards Granted by Honeywell—For periods prior to the Spin-Off, Honeywell maintained stock-based compensation plans for the benefit of its officers, directors and employees. Under the Former Parent´s stock-based compensation plans, Honeywell awarded RSUs, stock options and PSUs to certain employees. Stock-based compensation expense related to awards granted by Honeywell recognized in the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations amounted to $16 million and $15 million for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, of which approximately $10 million and $8 million are specifically identified for employees within the Business, respectively and $6 million and $7 million is related to shared employees not specifically identifiable to the Business, respectively. These amounts represent stock-based compensation expenses attributable to the Business based on the awards and terms previously granted under the incentive compensation plans to employees within the Business and an allocation of Former Parent’s corporate and shared functional employee stock based compensation expenses. Accordingly, the amounts presented are not necessarily indicative of current and future awards and do not necessarily reflect the results that the Business would have experienced as an independent company for the periods presented.
The activity related to stock based awards granted by Honeywell to employees of the Business for the year ended December 31, 2017 consisted of the following:
 




 

 

RSUs

 

 

Options

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Wtd Avg

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Number of

 

 

 

Grant Date

 

 

Number of

 

 

 

Wtd Avg

 



 

 

RSUs

 

 

 

Fair Value

 

 

Options

 

 

 

Exercise Price

 



Outstanding as of December 31, 2016

 

 

163,110

 

 

 

$

96

 

 

 

475,476

 

 

 

$

87

 



Granted(a)

 

 

45,503

 

 

 

 

131

 

 

 

162,600

 

 

 

 

125

 



Vested/exercised

 

 

(41,137

)

 

 

 

83

 

 

 

(121,231

)

 

 

 

79

 



Outstanding as of December 31, 2017

 

 

167,476

 

(b)(c)

 

$

108

 

 

 

516,845

 

(d)

 

$

101

 


 




(a)

Primarily represents awards granted by Honeywell in February and July 2017.




(b)

Aggregate unrecognized compensation expense related to RSUs was $9.4 million as of December 31, 2017, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.6 years.




(c)

Substantially all RSUs outstanding as of December 31, 2017 are expected to vest over time. 




(d)

Aggregate unrecognized compensation expense related to stock options was $4.2 million as of December 31, 2017, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.5 years.
Note 22. Earnings Per Share 
On October 1, 2018, the date of consummation of the Spin-Off, 74,070,852 shares of the Company’s common stock were distributed to Honeywell stockholders of record as of September 18, 2018 who held their shares through the Distribution Date. Basic and Diluted EPS for all historical periods prior to the Spin-Off reflect the number of distributed shares, or 74,070,852 shares. For 2018, these shares are treated as issued and outstanding from January 1, 2018 to the Spin-Off for purposes of calculating basic earnings per share. 
The details of the earnings per share calculations for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 are as follows:
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Basic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net Income

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)



Weighted average common shares outstanding

 

 

74,602,868

 

 

 

74,059,240

 

 

 

74,070,852

 



EPS – Basic

 

$

4.20

 

 

$

16.28

 

 

$

(13.27

)


94

 
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Diluted

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Net Income

 

$

313

 

 

$

1,206

 

 

$

(983

)



Weighted average common shares
outstanding – Basic

 

 

74,602,868

 

 

 

74,059,240

 

 

 

74,070,852

 



Dilutive effect of unvested RSUs

 

 

1,331,505

 

 

 

342,908

 

 

 

—

 



Weighted average common shares
outstanding – Diluted

 

 

75,934,373

 

 

 

74,402,148

 

 

 

74,070,852

 



EPS – Diluted

 

$

4.12

 

 

$

16.21

 

 

$

(13.27

)


 
Diluted EPS is computed based upon the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the year plus the dilutive effect of common stock equivalents using the treasury stock method and the average market price of our common stock for the year. 
 
The diluted earnings per share calculations exclude the effect of stock options when the options’ assumed proceeds exceed the average market price of the common shares during the period. For the year-ended December 31, 2019, there were 483,408 options of which 34,375 were forfeited. The remaining weighted number of stock options excluded from the computations was 371,529. These stock options were outstanding at December 31, 2019.
Note 23. Commitments and Contingencies
Obligations payable to Honeywell
Honeywell is a defendant in asbestos-related personal injury actions mainly related to its legacy Bendix friction materials (“Bendix”) business. The Bendix business manufactured automotive brake linings that contained chrysotile asbestos in an encapsulated form. Claimants consist largely of individuals who allege exposure to asbestos from brakes from either performing or being in the vicinity of individuals who performed brake replacements. Certain operations that were part of the Bendix business were transferred to Garrett.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into an Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell on September 12, 2018. As of the Spin-Off date of October 1, 2018, we are obligated to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. Pursuant to the terms of this Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, we are responsible for paying to Honeywell such amounts, up to a cap equal to the Euro-to-U.S. dollar exchange rate determined by Honeywell as of a date within two business days prior to the date of the Distribution (1.16977 USD = 1 EUR) equivalent of $175 million in respect of such liabilities arising in any given calendar year. The payments that we are required to make to Honeywell pursuant to the terms of this agreement will not be deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement. During 2019 and in the fourth quarter of 2018, we paid Honeywell the Euro-equivalent of $153 million and $41 million, respectively, in connection with the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. Garrett has made all payments under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement under protest, as described below. 
On December 2, 2019, the Company and its subsidiary, Garrett ASASCO Inc., filed a Summons with Notice in the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York (the “NY Supreme Court”) commencing an action (the “Action”) against Honeywell, certain of Honeywell’s subsidiaries and certain of Honeywell’s employees for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duties, aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary duties, corporate waste, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unjust enrichment. On January 15, 2020, the Company and Garrett ASASCO Inc., filed a Complaint in the NY Supreme Court in connection with the Action. The lawsuit arises from the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. The Company is seeking declaratory relief; compensatory damages in an amount to be determined at trial; rescission of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement; attorneys’ fees and costs and such other and further relief as the Court 
95

 
may deem just and proper. There can be no assurance as to the time and resources that will be required to pursue these claims or the ultimate outcome of the lawsuit. Among other claims, Garrett asserts that Honeywell is not entitled to indemnification because it improperly seeks indemnification for amounts attributable to punitive damages and intentional misconduct, and because it has failed to establish other prerequisites for indemnification under New York law.  Specifically, the claim asserts that Honeywell has failed to establish its right to indemnity for each and every asbestos settlement of the thousands for which it seeks indemnification. The Action seeks to establish that the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement is not enforceable, in whole or in part.
On September 12, 2018, we also entered into a Tax Matters Agreement with Honeywell (the “Tax Matters Agreement”), which governs the respective rights, responsibilities and obligations of Honeywell and us after the Spin-Off with respect to all tax matters (including tax liabilities, tax attributes, tax returns and tax contests). The Tax Matters Agreement generally provides that, following the Spin-Off date of October 1, 2018, we are responsible and will indemnify Honeywell for all taxes, including income taxes, sales taxes, VAT and payroll taxes, relating to Garrett for all periods, including periods prior to the completion date of the Spin-Off. Among other items, as a result of the mandatory transition tax imposed by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, one of our subsidiaries is required to make payments to a subsidiary of Honeywell in the amount representing the net tax liability of Honeywell under the mandatory transition tax attributable to us, as determined by Honeywell. We estimate that our total aggregate payments to Honeywell with respect to the mandatory transition tax will be $240 million with $193 million in payments remaining as of December 31, 2019. Under the terms of the Tax Matters Agreement, we are required to pay this amount in Euros, without interest, in five annual installments, each equal to 8% of the aggregate amount, followed by three additional annual installments equal to 15%, 20% and 25% of the aggregate amount, respectively. In connection with this agreement, we paid Honeywell the Euro-equivalent of $18 million and $19 million during 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively.
In addition, the Tax Matters Agreement addresses the allocation of liability for taxes incurred as a result of restructuring activities undertaken to effectuate the Spin-Off. The Tax Matters Agreement also provides that we are required to indemnify Honeywell for certain taxes (and reasonable expenses) resulting from the failure of the Spin-Off and related internal transactions to qualify for their intended tax treatment under U.S. federal, state and local income tax law, as well as foreign tax law. Further, the Tax Matters Agreement also imposes certain restrictions on us and our subsidiaries (including restrictions on share issuances, redemptions or repurchases, business combinations, sales of assets and similar transactions) that are designed to address compliance with Section 355 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and are intended to preserve the tax-free nature of the Spin-Off.
The following table summarizes our Obligation payable to Honeywell related to these agreements following the Spin-Off:
 




 

 

2019

 



 

 

Asbestos and
environmental

 

 

Tax Matters

 

 

Total

 



Beginning of year

 

$

1,244

 

 

$

282

 

 

$

1,526

 



Accrual for update to estimated liability

 

 

(18

)

 

 

3

 

 

 

(15

)



Legal fees expensed

 

 

44

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

44

 



Payments to Honeywell

 

 

(153

)

 

 

(18

)

 

 

(171

)



Currency translation adjustment

 

 

(27

)

 

 

(6

)

 

 

(33

)



End of year

 

$

1,090

 

 

$

261

 

 

$

1,351

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current

 

 

51

 

 

 

18

 

 

 

69

 



Non-current

 

 

1,039

 

 

 

243

 

 

 

1,282

 



Total

 

$

1,090

 

 

$

261

 

 

$

1,351

 


96

 
 




 

 

2018

 



 

 

Asbestos and
environmental

 

 

Tax Matters

 

 

Total

 



Beginning of year

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

1,328

 

 

 

308

 

 

 

1,636

 



Accrual for update to estimated liability

 

 

(30

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(30

)



Legal fees expensed

 

 

14

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

14

 



Payments to Honeywell

 

 

(41

)

 

 

(19

)

 

 

(60

)



Currency translation adjustment

 

 

(27

)

 

 

(7

)

 

 

(34

)



End of year

 

$

1,244

 

 

$

282

 

 

$

1,526

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current

 

 

108

 

 

 

19

 

 

 

127

 



Non-current

 

 

1,136

 

 

 

263

 

 

 

1,399

 



Total

 

$

1,244

 

 

$

282

 

 

$

1,526

 


 
Asbestos Matters
For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, these Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements reflect an estimated liability for resolution of pending and future asbestos-related and environmental liabilities primarily related to the Bendix legacy Honeywell business, calculated as if we were responsible for 100% of the Bendix asbestos-liability payments. However, this recognition model differs from the recognition model applied subsequent to the Spin-Off as outlined above. In periods subsequent to the Spin-Off, the accounting for the majority of our asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable reflect the terms of the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement with Honeywell entered into on September 12, 2018, under which we are required to make payments to Honeywell in amounts equal to 90% of Honeywell’s asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, primarily related to the Bendix business in the United States, as well as certain environmental-related liability payments and accounts payable and non-United States asbestos-related liability payments and accounts payable, in each case related to legacy elements of the Business, including the legal costs of defending and resolving such liabilities, less 90% of Honeywell’s net insurance receipts and, as may be applicable, certain other recoveries associated with such liabilities. The Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement provides that the agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (x) December 31, 2048 or (y) December 31st of the third consecutive year during which certain amounts owed to Honeywell during each such year were less than $25 million as converted into Euros in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
97

 
The following table summarizes information concerning both Bendix and other asbestos-related balances. Other represents asbestos liabilities related to claimants outside the United States.
Asbestos-Related Liabilities
 




 

 

Year ended December 31, 2019

 

 

Year ended December 31, 2018

 

 

Year ended December 31, 2017

 



 

 

Bendix

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 

 

Bendix

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 

 

Bendix

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 



Beginning of year

 

$

—

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

1,703

 

 

$

9

 

 

$

1,712

 

 

$

1,789

 

 

$

6

 

 

$

1,795

 



Accrual for update to
estimated liabilities

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

141

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

141

 

 

 

199

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

203

 



Change in estimated
cost of future claims

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(65

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

(65

)



Update of expected
resolution values
for pending claims

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

3

 



Asbestos-related
liability payments

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(151

)

 

 

(4

)

 

 

(155

)

 

 

(223

)

 

 

(1

)

 

 

(224

)



Spin-Off related
adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1,693

)

 

 

(4

)

 

 

(1,697

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Balance Sheet
Reclassification

 

 

—

 

 

 

(1

)

 

 

(1

)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



End of year

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

1,703

 

 

$

9

 

 

$

1,712

 


 
Insurance Recoveries for Asbestos-Related Liabilities
 




 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



 

 

Bendix

 

 

Bendix

 

 

Bendix

 



Beginning of year

 

$

—

 

 

$

191

 

 

$

201

 



Probable insurance recoveries related to estimated
liability

 

 

—

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

10

 



Insurance receipts for asbestos-related liabilities

 

 

—

 

 

 

(24

)

 

 

(20

)



Insurance receivables settlements and write-offs

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 



Other

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Spin-Off related adjustments

 

 

—

 

 

 

(178

)

 

 

—

 



 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

191

 


 
Asbestos balances are included in the following balance sheet accounts:
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Accrued liabilities

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 



Asbestos-related liabilities

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 



 

 

$

—

 

 

$

1

 


 
The following tables present information regarding Bendix-related asbestos claims activity:
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



Claims Activity

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Claims Unresolved at the beginning of year

 

 

6,209

 

 

 

6,280

 



Claims Filed

 

 

2,659

 

 

 

2,430

 



Claims Resolved

 

 

(2,388

)

 

 

(2,501

)



Claims Unresolved at the end of the year

 

 

6,480

 

 

 

6,209

 


98

 
 




 

 

December 31,

 



Disease Distribution of Unresolved Claims

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



Mesothelioma and Other Cancer Claims

 

 

3,399

 

 

 

2,949

 



Nonmalignant Claims

 

 

3,081

 

 

 

3,260

 



Total Claims

 

 

6,480

 

 

 

6,209

 


 
Honeywell has experienced average resolutions per Bendix-related asbestos claim, excluding legal costs, as follows:
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 

 

2016

 

 

2015

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(in whole dollars)

 



Malignant claims

 

$

50,200

 

 

$

55,300

 

 

$

56,000

 

 

$

44,000

 

 

$

44,000

 



Nonmalignant claims

 

$

3,900

 

 

$

4,700

 

 

$

2,800

 

 

$

4,485

 

 

$

100

 


 
It is not possible to predict whether resolution values for Bendix-related asbestos claims will increase, decrease or stabilize in the future.
Other Matters
We are subject to other lawsuits, investigations and disputes arising out of the conduct of our business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government contracts, product liability, prior acquisitions and divestitures, employee benefit plans, intellectual property and environmental, health and safety matters. We recognize a liability for any contingency that is probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. We continually assess the likelihood of adverse judgments of outcomes in these matters, as well as potential ranges of possible losses (taking into consideration any insurance recoveries), based on a careful analysis of each matter with the assistance of outside legal counsel and, if applicable, other experts. To date, no such matters are material to the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations.
Warranties and Guarantees
In the normal course of business, we issue product warranties and product performance guarantees. We accrue for the estimated cost of product warranties and performance guarantees based on contract terms and historical experience at the time of sale to the customer. Adjustments to initial obligations for warranties and guarantees are made as changes to the obligations become reasonably estimable. Product warranties and product performance guarantees are included in Accrued liabilities. The following table summarizes information concerning our recorded obligations for product warranties and product performance guarantees.
 




 

 

Years Ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



Beginning of year

 

$

32

 

 

$

28

 

 

$

22

 



Accruals for warranties/guarantees issued during the year

 

 

31

 

 

 

33

 

 

 

14

 



Settlement of warranty/guarantee claims

 

 

(34

)

 

 

(29

)

 

 

(8

)



 

 

$

29

 

 

$

32

 

 

$

28

 


 
Note 24. Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We sponsor several funded U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans. Pension benefits for many of our U.S. employees are provided through a non-contributory, qualified defined benefit plan. All non-union hourly and salaried employees that joined the Business or Garrett for the first time after December 31, 2012, are not eligible to participate in our U.S. defined benefit pension plans. We also sponsor defined benefit pension plans which cover non-U.S. employees who are not U.S. citizens, in Switzerland and Ireland. Other pension plans outside of the U.S. are not material to the Company either individually or in the aggregate.
99

 
For periods prior to the Spin-Off, we only accounted for our pension plan in Ireland as a defined benefit pension plan. Our other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. 
On October 1, 2018, in connection with the Spin-Off, we performed an interim remeasurement of our defined benefit pension plan in Ireland to update the discount rate as of the date immediately prior to the Spin-Off as mandated by the Employee Matters Agreement. 
The following tables summarize the balance sheet impact, including the benefit obligations, assets and funded status associated with our significant pension plans.
 




 

 

Pension Benefits

 



 

 

U.S.
Plans

 

 

U.S.
Plans

 

 

Non-U.S.
Plans

 

 

Non-U.S.
Plans

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 



Change in benefit obligation:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Benefit obligation at beginning of the year

 

$

178

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

172

 

 

$

107

 



Transfer of plan obligations from Former Parent

 

 

—

 

 

 

181

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

65

 



Spin-Off remeasurement adjustment

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

2

 



Service cost

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

4

 



Interest cost

 

 

7

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 



Plan amendments

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

1

 



Actuarial (gains) losses

 

 

29

 

 

 

(3

)

 

 

37

 

 

 

(5

)



Benefits paid

 

 

(9

)

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(6

)

 

 

(3

)



Foreign currency translation

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(5

)



Transfers

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

4

 



Other

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

—

 



Benefit obligation at end of the year

 

 

206

 

 

 

178

 

 

 

226

 

 

 

172

 



Change in plan assets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Fair value of plan assets at beginning of the year

 

 

177

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

123

 

 

 

64

 



Transfer of plan assets from Former Parent

 

 

—

 

 

 

181

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

54

 



Spin-Off remeasurement adjustment

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(10

)



Actual return on plan assets

 

 

36

 

 

 

(2

)

 

 

14

 

 

 

2

 



Employer contributions

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

6

 

 

 

16

 



Benefits paid

 

 

(9

)

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(6

)

 

 

(3

)



Foreign currency translation

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(4

)



Transfers

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

4

 



Other

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

—

 



Fair value of plan assets at end of year

 

 

204

 

 

 

177

 

 

 

150

 

 

 

123

 



Funded status of plans

 

$

(2

)

 

$

(1

)

 

$

(76

)

 

$

(49

)



Amounts recognized in Consolidated Balance Sheet
consist of:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Accrued pension liabilities - noncurrent(2)

 

 

(2

)

 

 

(1

)

 

 

(76

)

 

 

(49

)



Net amount recognized

 

$

(2

)

 

$

(1

)

 

$

(76

)

 

$

(49

)


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.




(2)

Included in Other liabilities in the Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheet
 
100

 
Amounts recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive (income) loss associated with our significant pension and other postretirement benefit plans at December 31, 2019 are as follows:
 




 

 

Pension Benefits

 



 

 

U.S.
Plans

 

 

U.S.
Plans

 

 

Non-U.S.
Plans

 

 

Non-U.S.
Plans

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 



Prior service (credit)

 

$

(2

)

 

$

(2

)

 

$

1

 

 

$

—

 



Net actuarial loss

 

 

6

 

 

 

4

 

 

 

21

 

 

 

7

 



Net amount recognized

 

$

4

 

 

$

2

 

 

$

22

 

 

$

7

 


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.
 
The components of net periodic benefit (income) cost and other amounts recognized in Other comprehensive (income) loss for our significant pension and other postretirement benefit plans include the following components:
 




 

 

Pension Benefits

 



 

 

U.S. Plans

 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



Net Periodic Benefit Cost

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 

 

2017(1)

 



Service cost

 

$

1

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

6

 

 

$

4

 

 

$

2

 



Interest cost

 

 

7

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

2

 



Expected return on plan assets

 

 

(10

)

 

 

(3

)

 

 

(4

)

 

 

(3

)

 

 

(2

)



Recognition of actuarial losses

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

13

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

—

 



Net periodic benefit (income) cost

 

$

(2

)

 

$

(1

)

 

$

17

 

 

$

6

 

 

$

2

 


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.
 




Other Changes in Plan Assets and Benefits Obligations
Recognized in

 

U.S. Plans

 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



Other Comprehensive (Income) Loss

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 

 

2017(1)

 



Actuarial (gains) losses

 

$

2

 

 

$

2

 

 

$

27

 

 

$

(4

)

 

$

—

 



Prior service (credit)

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 



Actuarial losses recognized during year

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

(13

)

 

 

(3

)

 

 

—

 



Foreign currency translation

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Total recognized in other comprehensive
(income) loss

 

$

2

 

 

$

2

 

 

$

16

 

 

$

(6

)

 

$

—

 



Total recognized in net periodic benefit
(income) cost and other comprehensive
(income) loss

 

$

—

 

 

$

1

 

 

$

33

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

2

 


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.
 
The estimated prior service (credit) for pension benefits that will be amortized from Accumulated other comprehensive (income) loss into net periodic benefit (income) cost in 2020 are expected to be less than $1 million for both the U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans.
101

 
Major actuarial assumptions used in determining the benefit obligations and net periodic benefit (income) cost for our significant benefit plans are presented in the following table as weighted averages.
 




 

 

Pension Benefits

 



 

 

U.S. Plans

 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 

 

2017(1)

 



Actuarial assumptions used to determine
benefit obligations as of December 31:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Discount rate

 

 

3.30

%

 

 

4.33

%

 

 

0.79

%

 

 

1.50

%

 

 

1.80

%



Expected annual rate of compensation
increase

 

 

3.74

%

 

 

3.74

%

 

 

1.77

%

 

 

1.77

%

 

 

2.00

%



Actuarial assumptions used to determine net
periodic benefit (income) cost for years
ended December 31:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Discount rate—benefit obligation

 

 

4.44

%

 

 

4.33

%

 

 

1.65

%

 

 

1.50

%

 

 

1.80

%



Discount rate—service cost

 

 

4.47

%

 

 

4.11

%

 

 

1.20

%

 

 

1.50

%

 

 

1.80

%



Discount rate—interest cost

 

 

4.06

%

 

 

4.02

%

 

 

1.74

%

 

 

1.50

%

 

 

1.80

%



Expected rate of return on plan assets

 

 

5.80

%

 

 

6.00

%

 

 

3.34

%

 

 

3.77

%

 

 

4.00

%



Expected annual rate of compensation
increase

 

 

3.74

%

 

 

3.74

%

 

 

1.77

%

 

 

1.77

%

 

 

2.00

%


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.
The discount rate for our significant pension plans reflects the current rate at which the associated liabilities could be settled at the measurement date of December 31. To determine the discount rates, we use a modeling process that involves matching the expected cash outflows of our benefit plans to a yield curve constructed from a portfolio of high quality, fixed-income debt instruments. We use the single weighted-average yield of this hypothetical portfolio as a discount rate benchmark. 
For both our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans, we estimate the service and interest cost components of net period benefit (income) cost by utilizing a full yield curve approach in the estimation of these cost components by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the pension benefit obligation to their underlying projected cash flows. This approach provides a more precise measurement of service and interest costs by improving the correlation between projected cash flows and their corresponding spot rates. 
For non-U.S. benefit plans, actuarial assumptions reflect economic and market factors relevant to each country.
The following amounts relate to our significant pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations exceeding the fair value of plan assets.
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

U.S. Plans

 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2019

 

 

2018(1)

 



Projected benefit obligation

 

$

—

 

 

$

178

 

 

$

226

 

 

$

172

 



Accumulated benefit obligation

 

 

—

 

 

 

177

 

 

 

212

 

 

 

164

 



Fair value of plan assets

 

 

—

 

 

 

177

 

 

 

150

 

 

 

123

 


 




(1)

For the periods prior to the Spin-Off, only the pension plan in Ireland is reflected as a non-U.S. defined benefit pension plan as all other pension plans were accounted for as multiemployer plans. Following the Spin-Off, the defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland is also reflected.
102

 
Our asset investment strategy for our U.S. pension plan focuses on maintaining a diversified portfolio using various asset classes in order to achieve market exposure and diversification on an interim basis as we develop our long-term investment objectives on a risk adjusted basis. Once finalized, we will implement our long-term strategy. Our interim target allocations are as follows: 35% equity securities, 50% fixed income securities and cash, 10% real estate investments, and 5% high yield bonds. Equity securities include mutual funds that invest in companies located both inside and outside the United States. Fixed income securities include exposure to medium and high quality investment grade corporate bonds, pooled consumer loans and U.S. government bonds with an average maturity of 5 – 25 years. The real estate fund invests in real estate investment trusts – companies that purchase office buildings, hotels and other real estate property. The high yield bond fund invests in a diversified portfolio of intermediate term below investment-grade debt securities. Our assets are reviewed on a daily basis to ensure that we are within the targeted asset allocation ranges and, if necessary, asset balances are adjusted back within target allocations.
Our non-U.S. pension assets are typically managed by decentralized fiduciary committees. Our non-U.S. investment policies are different for each country as local regulations, funding requirements, and financial and tax considerations are part of the funding and investment allocation process in each country.
The fair values of both our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans assets by asset category are as follows:
 




 

 

U.S. Plans

 



 

 

December 31, 2019

 



 

 

Total

 

 

Level 1

 

 

Level 2

 

 

Level 3

 



Equity funds

 

$

74

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

74

 

 

$

—

 



Short-term investments

 

 

2

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

—

 



Corporate bond funds

 

 

106

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

106

 

 

 

—

 



Real estate funds

 

 

22

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

22

 

 

 

—

 



Total assets at fair value

 

$

204

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

204

 

 

$

—

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

U.S. Plans

 



 

 

December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Total

 

 

Level 1

 

 

Level 2

 

 

Level 3

 



Equity funds

 

$

60

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

60

 

 

$

—

 



Short-term investments

 

 

8

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

8

 

 

 

—

 



Corporate bond funds

 

 

92

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

92

 

 

 

—

 



Real estate funds

 

 

17

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

17

 

 

 

—

 



Total assets at fair value

 

$

177

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

177

 

 

$

—

 


 




 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



 

 

December 31, 2019

 



 

 

Total

 

 

Level 1

 

 

Level 2

 

 

Level 3

 



Cash and cash equivalents

 

$

2

 

 

$

2

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

—

 



Equity funds

 

 

68

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

68

 

 

 

—

 



Government bond funds

 

 

30

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

30

 

 

 

—

 



Corporate bond funds

 

 

21

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

21

 

 

 

—

 



Real estate funds

 

 

18

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

18

 

 

 

—

 



Other

 

 

11

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

11

 

 

 

—

 



Total assets at fair value

 

$

150

 

 

$

2

 

 

$

148

 

 

$

—

 


103

 
 




 

 

Non-U.S. Plans

 



 

 

December 31, 2018

 



 

 

Total

 

 

Level 1

 

 

Level 2

 

 

Level 3

 



Equity funds

 

$

48

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

48

 

 

$

—

 



Short-term investments

 

 

12

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

12

 

 

 

—

 



Government bond funds

 

 

28

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

28

 

 

 

—

 



Corporate bond funds

 

 

16

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

—

 



Real estate funds

 

 

11

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

11

 

 

 

—

 



Other

 

 

8

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

8

 

 

 

—

 



Total assets at fair value

 

$

123

 

 

$

—

 

 

$

123

 

 

$

—

 


 
Equity funds, corporate bond funds, government bond funds, real estate funds and short-term investments are valued either by bids provided by brokers or dealers or quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics. Other includes diversified mutual funds. These investments are valued at estimated fair value based on quarterly financial information received from the investment advisor and/or general partner.
Our general funding policy for qualified defined benefit pension plans is to contribute amounts at least sufficient to satisfy regulatory funding standards. We are not required to make any contributions to our U.S. pension plan in 2020. In 2019, contributions of $6 million were made to our non-U.S. pension plans to satisfy regulatory funding requirements. In 2020, we expect to make contributions of cash and/or marketable securities of approximately $7 million to our non-U.S. pension plans to satisfy regulatory funding standards. Contributions for both our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans do not reflect benefits paid directly from Company assets.
Benefit payments, including amounts to be paid from Company assets, and reflecting expected future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid as follows:
 




 

 

U.S.
Plans

 

 

Non-U.S.
Plans

 



2020

 

$

10

 

 

$

3

 



2021

 

 

10

 

 

 

3

 



2022

 

 

10

 

 

 

3

 



2023

 

 

11

 

 

 

4

 



2024

 

 

11

 

 

 

4

 



2025-2029

 

 

57

 

 

 

21

 


 
Note 25. China Variable Interest Entity
On September 20, 2018 in preparation of the Spin-Off, the Company entered into an agreement by and between Honeywell International Inc. and Garrett Motion Inc. (the “China Purchase Agreement”) in which Honeywell agreed to sell to Garrett 100% of the equity interests of Honeywell Transportation Investment (China) Co., Ltd. (“Garrett China”) consisting of our primary operations in China, in exchange for upfront consideration of 8,444,077 shares of our common stock. No further consideration from Garrett is due. The China Purchase Agreement has been amended to extend the date of the transfer of the equity interests in Garrett China from September 20, 2019 to June 30, 2020. 
Garrett China is considered a variable interest entity for which Garrett is the primary beneficiary because the China Purchase Agreement provides Garrett, prior to the transfer of the equity interests, control to direct the management and operation of Garrett China as well as all economic benefits and losses. The intent of the agreement is to place Garrett in the same position as if it already owned 100% of the equity interests of Garrett China. As the agreement was effective prior to the Spin-Off date while the Company and Garrett China were under common control of Honeywell, the assets and liabilities of Garrett China are recognized at their carrying amounts. Additionally, the assets and liabilities and related operations of Garrett China were included in our Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets and Consolidated and Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations as of and for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 which were prepared on a carve-out basis.
104

 
The following table summarizes the consolidated assets and liabilities of Garrett China:
 




 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 



 

 

(Dollars in millions)

 



ASSETS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current assets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Cash and cash equivalents

 

$

141

 

 

$

70

 



Accounts, notes and other receivables, net

 

 

254

 

 

 

224

 



Inventories, net

 

 

27

 

 

 

19

 



Other current assets

 

 

1

 

 

 

—

 



Total current assets

 

 

423

 

 

 

313

 



Property, plant and equipment, net

 

 

82

 

 

 

67

 



Deferred income taxes

 

 

26

 

 

 

28

 



Other assets

 

 

1

 

 

 

1

 



Total assets

 

$

532

 

 

$

409

 



LIABILITIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Current liabilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Accounts payable

 

$

326

 

 

$

261

 



Accrued liabilities

 

 

80

 

 

 

84

 



Total current liabilities

 

 

406

 

 

 

345

 



Other liabilities

 

 

10

 

 

 

13

 



Total liabilities

 

$

416

 

 

$

358

 


 
Net sales from Garrett China were $530 million, $470 million and $393 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 respectively. Related expenses primarily consisted of Costs of Goods Sold of $370 million, $340 million and $310 million, Selling, general and administrative expenses of $14 million, $19 million and $20 million and Tax expense of $25 million, $25 million and $28 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 respectively.
Note 26. Concentrations 
Sales concentration—Net sales by region (determined based on country of shipment) and channel are as follows:
 




 

 

Year ended December 31, 2019

 



 

 

OEM

 

 

Aftermarket

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 



United States

 

$

307

 

 

$

171

 

 

$

7

 

 

$

485

 



Europe

 

 

1,631

 

 

 

136

 

 

 

39

 

 

 

1,806

 



Asia

 

 

843

 

 

 

51

 

 

 

29

 

 

 

923

 



Other International

 

 

15

 

 

 

19

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

34

 



 

 

$

2,796

 

 

$

377

 

 

$

75

 

 

$

3,248

 


 




 

 

Year ended December 31, 2018

 



 

 

OEM

 

 

Aftermarket

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 



United States

 

$

338

 

 

$

175

 

 

$

5

 

 

$

518

 



Europe

 

 

1,686

 

 

 

151

 

 

 

54

 

 

 

1,891

 



Asia

 

 

847

 

 

 

50

 

 

 

26

 

 

 

923

 



Other International

 

 

22

 

 

 

21

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

43

 



 

 

$

2,893

 

 

$

397

 

 

$

85

 

 

$

3,375

 


105

 
 




 

 

Year ended December 31, 2017

 



 

 

OEM

 

 

Aftermarket

 

 

Other

 

 

Total

 



United States

 

$

277

 

 

$

178

 

 

$

6

 

 

$

461

 



Europe

 

 

1,568

 

 

 

140

 

 

 

54

 

 

 

1,762

 



Asia

 

 

750

 

 

 

49

 

 

 

33

 

 

 

832

 



Other International

 

 

19

 

 

 

22

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

41

 



 

 

$

2,614

 

 

$

389

 

 

$

93

 

 

$

3,096

 


 
 
Customer concentration—Net sales to Garrett’s largest customers and the corresponding percentage of total net sales are as follows:
 




 

 

Net sales

 



 

 

Years ended December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

%

 

 

2018

 

 

%

 

 

2017

 

 

%

 



Customer A

 

$

374

 

 

 

12

 

 

$

455

 

 

 

13

 

 

$

423

 

 

 

14

 



Others

 

 

2,874

 

 

 

88

 

 

 

2,920

 

 

 

87

 

 

 

2,673

 

 

 

86

 



 

 

$

3,248

 

 

 

100

 

 

$

3,375

 

 

 

100

 

 

$

3,096

 

 

 

100

 


 
Long-lived assets concentration—Long-lived assets by region are as follows:.
 




 

 

Long-lived Assets(1)

 



 

 

December 31,

 



 

 

2019

 

 

2018

 

 

2017

 



United States

 

$

24

 

 

$

26

 

 

$

23

 



Europe

 

 

285

 

 

 

273

 

 

 

273

 



Asia

 

 

141

 

 

 

123

 

 

 

124

 



Other International

 

 

21

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

22

 



 

 

$

471

 

 

$

438

 

 

$

442

 


 




(1)

Long-lived assets are comprised of property, plant and equipment–net.
Supplier concentration—The Company’s largest supplier accounted for 12%, 14% and 16% of direct materials purchases for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 respectively.
Note 27. Unaudited Quarterly Financial Information
The following tables show selected unaudited quarterly results of operations for 2019 and 2018. The quarterly data have been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual financial statements and include all adjustments, which include only normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair statement of our results of operations for these periods.
 




 

 

2019

 



 

 

March 31

 

 

June 30

 

 

September 30

 

 

December 31

 

 

Year Ended
December 31,

 



Net Sales

 

$

835

 

 

$

802

 

 

$

781

 

 

$

830

 

 

$

3,248

 



Gross Profit

 

 

196

 

 

 

182

 

 

 

172

 

 

 

161

 

 

 

711

 



Net Income (Loss)

 

 

73

 

 

 

66

 

 

 

38

 

 

 

136

 

 

 

313

 



Earnings (loss) per share - basic

 

 

0.98

 

 

 

0.88

 

 

 

0.51

 

 

 

1.82

 

 

 

4.20

 



Earnings (loss) per share - diluted

 

 

0.97

 

 

 

0.86

 

 

 

0.50

 

 

 

1.79

 

 

 

4.12

 


106

 
 




 

 

2018

 



 

 

March 31

 

 

June 30

 

 

September 30(b)

 

 

December 31(c)

 

 

Year Ended
December 31,

 



Net Sales

 

$

915

 

 

$

877

 

 

$

784

 

 

$

799

 

 

$

3,375

 



Gross Profit

 

 

211

 

 

 

215

 

 

 

178

 

 

 

172

 

 

 

776

 



Net Income (Loss)

 

 

58

 

 

 

150

 

 

 

929

 

 

 

69

 

 

 

1,206

 



Earnings (Loss) per share - basic(a)

 

 

0.78

 

 

 

2.03

 

 

 

12.54

 

 

 

0.93

 

 

 

16.28

 



Earnings per share - diluted(a)

 

 

0.78

 

 

 

2.03

 

 

 

12.54

 

 

 

0.92

 

 

 

16.21

 


 




(a)

On October 1, 2018, the date of consummation of the Spin-Off, 74,070,852 shares of the Company’s common stock were distributed to Honeywell stockholders of record as of September 18, 2018 who held their shares through the Distribution Date. Basic and Diluted EPS for all periods prior to the Spin-Off reflect the number of distributed shares, or 74,070,852 shares.




(b)

Net income for three months ended September 30, 2018 was impacted by an $870 million reduction in tax expense primarily due to tax benefits from an internal restructuring of Garrett’s business in advance of the Spin-Off and tax benefits related to the currency impacts on withholding taxes on undistributed foreign earnings, partially offset by adjustments to the provisional tax amount related to U.S. tax reform and non-deductible expenses.




(c)

In the fourth quarter of 2019, we identified errors in our income tax accounts for the year ended and as of December 31, 2018. The errors included an overstatement of current and deferred tax liability balances that were recorded in connection with the Spin-Off from Honeywell and an overstatement of income tax expense for the quarter ended December 31, 2018. As a result, we have revised our previously issued unaudited consolidated financial statements for the quarter ended and as of December 31, 2018. Refer to Note 8 for additional information.
 
 
 
 
 
107

 
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
The information required by this Item 9 was previously reported in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K that was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 6, 2018.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our Chief Executive Officer and Interim Chief Financial Officer, conducted an evaluation of our disclosure controls and procedures, as such term is defined under Rule 13a-15(e) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). In designing and evaluating our disclosure controls and procedures, management recognizes that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives. In addition, the design of disclosure controls and procedures must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints and that management is required to apply judgment in evaluating the benefits of possible controls and procedures relative to their costs. Based on management's evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Interim Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective at the reasonable assurance level as of December 31, 2019.
Remediation of Material Weakness in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
As previously disclosed, in the course of preparing our 2018 Form 10-K and our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2018, our management determined that there was a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting relating to the lack of information, documentation and supporting evidence for our liability to Honeywell under the Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement (the “Indemnification Liability”). Specifically, despite our requests, we did not receive sufficient information, documents and explanations from Honeywell, including with regard to information provided in Honeywell's actuary report and the amounts of settlement values and insurance receivables. 
Throughout the year ended December 31, 2019, management engaged in an active dialogue with Honeywell that resulted in the Company obtaining access to additional information and documentation from Honeywell, including information regarding historical settlement trends, Honeywell’s claims management and valuation processes for asserted claims and associated legal expenses, and the nature of insurance receivables and likelihood of recoverability. Additionally, as part of the additional information and documentation we received from Honeywell, we gained increased visibility into the methodology behind, and data sources and inputs included in, Honeywell’s actuary report, and engaged our own expert to review and evaluate the report. During the quarter ended December 31, 2019, management completed its remediation activities and tested the design and operational effectiveness of the modified and new controls. As a result of the remediation activities and controls in place as of December 31, 2019, management concluded that we have remediated the material weakness described above.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the Exchange Act. 
Our management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria set forth in “Internal Control-Integrated Framework (2013)” issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on this assessment, management concluded that, as of December 31, 2019, our internal control over financial reporting was effective. 
108

 
Deloitte SA, our independent registered public accounting firm, has issued an attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting, which is included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Other than as relates to the remediation of the material weakness described below, there have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) during the quarter ended December 31, 2019 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None
109

 
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
 
Information about Directors and Executive Officers
The following table presents information concerning our executive officers and directors.
 




Name

 

Age

 

Position



Olivier Rabiller

 

49

 

Director, President & Chief Executive Officer



Carlos Cardoso

 

62

 

Chairman of the Board



Maura J. Clark

 

61

 

Director



Courtney Enghauser

 

47

 

Director



Susan L. Main

 

61

 

Director



Carsten J. Reinhardt

 

52

 

Director



Scott Tozier

 

54

 

Director



Craig Balis

 

55

 

Senior Vice President & Chief Technology Officer



Peter Bracke

 

53

 

Interim Chief Financial Officer



Daniel Deiro

 

47

 

Senior Vice President, Global Customer Management & General Manager Japan/Korea



Thierry Mabru

 

52

 

Senior Vice President, Integrated Supply Chain



Jerome Maironi

 

54

 

Senior Vice President, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary



Fabrice Spenninck

 

51

 

Senior Vice President & Chief Human Resources Officer


 
The following are brief biographies describing the backgrounds of our executive officers and directors.
Olivier Rabiller
Mr. Rabiller has served as President & Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) as well as a member of the Board of Directors since the Company the Spin-Off. Prior to the Spin Off, Mr. Rabiller served as President and CEO of the Transportation Systems division at Honeywell from 2016 until the Spin Off. Mr. Rabiller’s global career spanned approximately 16 years at Honeywell where he also served as Vice President and General Manager of Transportation Systems for High Growth Regions, Business Development, and Aftermarket (from July 2014 to July 2016) as well as Vice President and General Manager, Transportation Systems Aftermarket (from January 2012 to July 2014). Earlier positions within Honeywell included Vice President of Sourcing for Transportation Systems; Vice President of Customer Management for Passenger Vehicles at Honeywell Turbo Technologies; Vice President, European Sales and Customer Management; and Director of Marketing and Business Development for the European region. He joined Honeywell in 2002 as Senior Program Manager and Business Development Manager for Turbo Technologies EMEA. Mr. Rabiller is a director of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, a non-profit organization which facilitates business relations between Switzerland and the United States. From 2012 to 2016, Mr. Rabiller was a director of Friction Material Pacifica, Australia. He holds a Master's degree in Engineering from Ecole Centrale Nantes and an MBA from INSEAD. We believe Mr. Rabiller is qualified to serve as a member of our Board of Directors because of his extensive experience at the Transportation Systems division at Honeywell, his background within the automotive industry and his strong leadership abilities.
Carlos Cardoso
Mr. Cardoso has served as  the Non-Executive Chairman of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off and the Principal of CMPC Advisors LLC since January 2015. Previously, he served as Senior Advisor of Irving Place Capital where he focused on investments in industrial manufacturing and distribution companies from July 2015 to August 2018. Mr. Cardoso was also Chairman and CEO of Kennametal, a global leader in metalworking solutions and engineered components serving a diverse set of industrial and infrastructure markets. Before serving as CEO, Mr. Cardoso served as Kennametal’s Vice President and Chief Operating Officer (“COO”). Prior to Kennametal, he held executive roles at Flowserve and Honeywell (Allied Signal). Mr. Cardoso currently serves on the Boards of Stanley Black & Decker, Inc. and Hubbell Incorporated. He has been named one of America’s “Best Chief Executive Officers” by Institutional Investor Magazine. Mr. Cardoso earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration from Fairfield University and a Master’s degree in Management from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. He received an honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Saint Vincent College in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. We believe Mr. Cardoso is qualified to serve as a member and Chairman of our Board of Directors because of his background as a director for public companies and his expertise in companies with extensive manufacturing and distribution operations.
110

 
Maura J. Clark
Ms. Clark has served as a member of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off. From 2005 to 2014, Ms. Clark served as President of Direct Energy Business, LLC, a leading North American retail energy business serving commercial and industrial companies, and Senior Vice President North American Strategy and Mergers and Acquisitions of Direct Energy. Her prior experience includes serving as Managing Director of Investment Banking Services at Goldman Sachs & Co. and as Executive Vice President of Corporate Development and Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) of Clark USA, an independent oil refining and marketing company. Ms. Clark is a member of the Boards of Nutrien Ltd, Fortis Inc., and Sanctuary for Families, a New York-based not-for-profit organization. She previously served on the Boards of Elizabeth Arden, Inc. and Primary Care Development Corp. She graduated from Queens University with a Bachelor of Arts in Economics. She is also qualified as a Charted Professional Accountant. We believe Ms. Clark is qualified to serve as a member of our Board due to her financial management expertise and experience managing the operations of a retail energy business serving industrial and commercial customers. She also has significant experience serving on other public company boards.
Courtney M. Enghauser
Ms. Enghauser has served as  a member of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off and has served as the CFO of Agility Global Holdings, a private equity owned platform acquiring and operating businesses in the automotive plastics sector, since November 2019. Prior to her current role, she advised private equity firms on acquisitions and transactions in a variety of industries. From April 2013 to June 2017, she was the CFO of Sensus, a leading provider of smart meters, network technologies, and advanced data analytics services that was acquired by Xylem Inc. in 2016. Prior to her time at Sensus, Ms. Enghauser was the CFO of Kinetek, Inc., where she was responsible for the financial management, treasury, and reporting of a global portfolio company consisting of 11 operating subsidiaries and 16 holding companies in the electric motors and controls industries located throughout the world. Ms. Enghauser also served as CFO of other businesses and held a variety of other financial positions including Director of Finance - Mergers and Acquisitions, and Corporate Controller. She started her career as an Auditor at PriceWaterhouseCoopers. Ms. Enghauser graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Accounting from Indiana University and is a Certified Public Accountant.  We believe Ms. Enghauser is qualified to serve on our Board due to her significant experience in the technology sector and her expertise in global financial strategy.
Susan L. Main
Ms. Main has served as a member of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off and has served as the Senior Vice President and CFO of Teledyne Technologies Incorporated, a leading provider of sophisticated instrumentation, digital imaging products and software, aerospace and defense electronics, and engineered systems, since November 2012. Prior to her current role, Ms. Main was Teledyne’s Vice President and Controller for approximately nine years. From 1999 to 2004, Ms. Main served as Vice President and Controller for Water Pik Technologies, Inc. Ms. Main also held numerous financial roles at the former Allegheny Teledyne Inc. within its government, industrial and commercial segments. Earlier in her career, Ms. Main held financial and auditing roles at the former Hughes Aircraft Company. Ms. Main is a member of the Board of Ashland Global Holdings, Inc., where she serves as the Chairperson of the Audit Committee and as a member of the Governance and Nominating Committee. Ms. Main is a member of the National Association of Corporate Directors and Women Corporate Directors. Ms. Main graduated from California State University, Fullerton with a Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration. We believe Ms. Main is qualified to serve on our Board based on her experience in financial management.
Carsten J. Reinhardt
Mr. Reinhardt has served as  a member of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off and is currently an Independent Senior Advisor. From 2012 to October 2016, Mr. Reinhardt was President and CEO of Voith Turbo GmbH & Co. KG, a supplier of advanced powertrain technologies to the rail, commercial vehicle, marine, power generation, oil & gas and mining industries. Prior to that, Mr. Reinhardt served as COO of Meritor Inc. from 2008 to 2011 and as President of Meritor’s Commercial Vehicle Division from 2006 to 2008. Before joining Meritor, Mr. Reinhardt served as President and CEO of Detroit Diesel Corp. from 2003 to 2006, following 10 years in a variety of management positions at Daimler Trucks North America. Mr. Reinhardt started his career as management trainee at Daimler AG in Stuttgart, Germany. Mr. Reinhardt is a member of the Boards of Grundfos Holding A/S Holding, SAF-Holland S.A., Tegimus Holding GmbH and Beinbauer Automotive GmbH. Mr. Reinhardt holds a Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical Engineering from Esslingen Technical University in Germany and a Master of Science degree in Automobile Engineering from the University of Hertfordshire, UK. We believe Mr. Reinhardt is qualified to serve on our Board due to his extensive experience and operational expertise in the automotive industry across global markets.
111

 
Scott Tozier
Mr. Tozier has served as a member of our Board of Directors since the Spin-Off and has been the CFO and Executive Vice President of Albemarle Corporation since January 2011. Prior to joining Albemarle, he served as Vice President of Finance, Transformation and Operations of Honeywell where he was responsible for Honeywell's global financial shared services and best practices management. His 16-year career with Honeywell spanned senior financial positions in the United States, Asia Pacific and Europe. Mr. Tozier currently serves as a member of the Boards for MARBL and Volta Energy Technologies. He is also a trustee for Blumenthal Performing Arts, and on the Board of Advisors for Junior Achievement of the Carolinas. He holds a Bachelor of Business Administration in Accounting from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Mr. Tozier holds an MBA from the University of Michigan, where he graduated with honors. He is a Certified Public Accountant. We believe Mr. Tozier is qualified to serve on our Board due to his experience as a former executive within Honeywell, a global public company, as well as his financial management skills given his background as a CFO and a Certified Public Accountant.
Craig Balis
Mr. Balis has served as our Senior Vice President and Chief Technology Officer since the Spin-Off. From June 2014 until such appointment, Mr. Balis was the Vice President and Chief Technology Officer of Honeywell Transportation Systems. From 2008 to 2014, Mr. Balis was the Vice President of Engineering of Honeywell Transportation Systems. Mr. Balis has a Bachelor of Science and Master’s degree in Engineering from the University of Illinois.
 
Peter Bracke
Mr. Bracke has served as Vice President and Interim CFO since September 2019. Previously, Mr. Bracke was Vice President, FP&A and Business Finance for Garrett where he was responsible for the financial planning and control of operational and commercial activities from the Spin-Off to September 2019. Prior to this, Mr. Bracke held various senior-level roles within multiple divisions at Honeywell. During his more than 20-year tenure at Honeywell, Mr. Bracke was CFO for Honeywell Homes & Buildings Technologies and CFO for Honeywell Transportation Systems, which was renamed Garrett following the Spin Off. Prior to joining Honeywell, Mr. Bracke was an auditor at KPMG. He received his undergraduate degree in Business Administration and his Master's degree in Accountancy from the University of Ghent in Belgium.
Daniel Deiro
Mr. Deiro has served as our Senior Vice President, Global Customer Management, and General Manager Japan/Korea since the Spin-Off. From August 2014 until such appointment, Mr. Deiro was the Vice President of Customer Management and General Manager for Honeywell Transportation Systems for Japan and Korea. From 2012 until 2014, Mr. Deiro was a Senior Customer Management Director at Honeywell Transportation Systems. Mr. Deiro has a degree in Automotive Engineering from Haute ecole specialisee bernoise, Technique et lnformatique (BFH-TI), Biel, Switzerland.
Thierry Mabru
Mr. Mabru has served as our Senior Vice President, Integrated Supply Chain since the Spin-Off. From March 2013 until such appointment, Mr. Mabru was the Vice President of Global Integrated Supply Chain for Honeywell Transportation Systems. From 2011 until 2013, Mr. Mabru was Senior Director of Global Advanced Manufacturing Engineering for Honeywell Transportation Systems. From 2006 to 2011, Mr. Mabru was Director of the Program Management Office of Honeywell Aerospace EMEAI. Mr. Mabru currently serves as a member of the Board of Friction Material Pacific (FMP) Group Australia PTY Limited and the Board of Friction Material Pacific (FMP) Group PTY Limited. Mr. Mabru holds a Master of Science degree from the Ecole Nationale de Mecanique et d'Aerotechniques (ISAE/ENSMA), Poitier, France.
112

 
Jerome Maironi
Mr. Maironi has served as our Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary since the Spin-Off. Previously, Mr. Maironi served as the Vice President of Global Legal Affairs for Honeywell Performance Materials and Technologies for approximately five years. Mr. Maironi received a post-graduate degree in Law & Practice of International Trade and a Master of Law from the University Rene Descartes, Paris, France. Mr. Maironi is a member of the Association Francaise des Juristes d'Entreprise and has also passed the French Bar Exam. Mr. Maironi graduated with an Executive Directors Programme from INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France.
Fabrice Spenninck
Mr. Spenninck has served as our Senior Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer since the Spin-Off. From August 2015 until such appointment, Mr. Spenninck was Vice President of Human Resources of Honeywell Transportation Systems. From 2013 to 2015, Mr. Spenninck was Vice President of Labor and Employee Relations and, from 2011 to 2013, he was Senior Director of Human Resources (One Country Leader) in France and North Africa at Honeywell. Mr. Spenninck holds a Master’s degree in Human Resources and Labor Relations from the University of Montpellier, France.
Code of Business Conduct
The Board has adopted a written code of business conduct (the “Code of Conduct”), which applies to all of our directors, officers and employees, including our principal executive officer and our principal financial and accounting officer. Our Code of Conduct is available on our website www.garrettmotion.com in the “Investors” section under “Governance.” In addition, we intend to post on our website all disclosures that are required by law or New York Stock Exchange listing rules concerning any amendments to, or waivers from, any provision of our Code of Conduct. 
Other
The remaining information required to be disclosed by this item will be included under the headings “Election of Directors,” “Corporate Governance,” and, if applicable, “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” in our definitive proxy statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The information required to be disclosed by this item will be included under the headings “Executive Compensation” and “Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation” in our definitive proxy statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
     
113

 
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Securities Authorized For Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans (As of December 31, 2019)
 




Plan category:

 

Number of Securities to
be Issued Upon Exercise
of Outstanding Options,
Warrants, and Rights

 

 

Weighted-Average
Exercise Price of
Outstanding Options,
Warrants, and Rights

 

 

Number of Securities
Available for Future
Issuance Under Equity
Compensation Plans
(excludes securities
Reflected in first column)

 



Equity compensation plans approved by
security holders

 

 

3,574,994

 

 

 

16.17

 

 

 

5,853,036

 



Equity compensation plans not approved by
security holders

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 

 

 

—

 



Total

 

 

3,574,994

 

 

$

16.17

 

 

 

5,853,036

 


 
Other
The remaining information required to be disclosed by this item will be included under the heading “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management” in our definitive proxy statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
114

 
 
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required to be disclosed by this item will be included under the headings “Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions,” “Corporate Governance” and “Director Independence” in our definitive proxy statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
The information required to be disclosed by this item will be included under the heading “Principal Accountant Fees and Services” in our definitive proxy statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
115
 

 
Part IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a) Documents filed as part of this report:
1. The following financial statements are included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” herein. 
 




Report of Independent Registered Accounting Firm

 

58



Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.

 

62



Consolidated and Combined Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.

 

63



Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018.

 

64



Consolidated and Combined Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.

 

65



Consolidated And Combined Statements Of Equity (Deficit) for the years ended December 2019, 2018 and 2017.

 

66



Notes to Consolidated And Combined Financial Statements 

 

67


 
 
2. All schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required or the required information is shown in the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto.
3. The exhibits to this report are listed below
 




 

 

 

Incorporated by Reference



Exhibit
Number

 

Description

Form

File No.

Exhibit

Filing
Date

Filed/
Furnished Herewith



2.1

 

Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement, dated September 12, 2018, by and among Honeywell ASASCO Inc., Honeywell ASASCO 2 Inc., and Honeywell International Inc. 

 

 

 

 

*



2.2

 

Tax Matters Agreement, dated September 12, 2018, by and between Honeywell International Inc., Garrett Motion Inc., and, solely for purposes of Section 3.02(g), 5.05 and 6.13(b), Honeywell ASASCO Inc. and Honeywell ASASCO 2 Inc.

8-K

001-38636

2.2

9/14/2018

 



2.3

 

Separation and Distribution Agreement, dated September 27, 2018, between Honeywell and Garrett

8-K

001-38636

2.1

10/1/2018

 



2.4

 

Transition Services Agreement, dated September 27, 2018, between Honeywell and Garrett Transportation I Inc.

8-K

001-28636

2.2

10/1/2018

 



2.5

 

Employee Matters Agreement, dated September 27, 2018, between Honeywell and Garrett

8-K

001-28636

2.3

10/1/2018

 



2.6

 

Intellectual Property Agreement, dated September 27, 2018, between Honeywell and Garrett

8-K

001-28636

2.4

10/1/2018

 



2.7

 

Trademark License Agreement, dated September 27, 2018, between Honeywell and Garrett

8-K

001-28636

2.5

10/1/2018

 



3.1

 

Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Garrett Motion Inc.

S-8

333-227619

4.1

10/1/2018

 



3.2

 

Amended and Restated By-laws of Garrett Motion Inc.

8-K

333-227619

4.2

10/1/2018

 



4.1

 

Indenture, dated as of September 27, 2018, between Garrett LX I S.à r.l, Garrett Borrowing LLC, the Company, the guarantors named therein, Deutsche Trustee Company Limited, as Trustee, Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch, as Security Agent and Paying Agent, and Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A., as Registrar and Transfer Agent 

8-K

001-38636

4.1

10/1/2018

 



4.2

 

Description of Capital Stock

 

 

 

 

*

116

 




10.1

 

Credit Agreement, dated as of September 27, 2018, by and among the Company, Garrett LX I S.à r.l., Garrett LX II S.à r.l., Garrett LX III S.à r.l., Garrett Borrowing LLC, and Honeywell Technologies Sàrl, the Lenders and Issuing Banks party hereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.

8-K

001-38636

10.1

10/1/2018

 



10.2

 

Intercreditor Agreement, dated as of September 27, 2018, among Garrett Motion Inc., Garrett LX I S.à r.l, Garrett LX II S.à r.l, Garrett LX III S.à r.l, Honeywell Technologies Sàrl, Garrett Borrowing LLC, other debtors and grantors party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Deutsche Trust Company Limited, Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch, other lenders party thereto from time to time, Honeywell ASASCO 2 Inc., and each additional representative from time to time party thereto

8-K

001-38636

10.2

10/1/2018

 



10.3†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates

S-8

333-227619

4.3

10/1/2018

 



10.4†

 

2018 Stock Plan for Non-Employee Directors of Garrett Motion Inc.

S-8

333-227619

4.4

10/1/2018

 



10.5†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates Form of Stock Option Award Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.5

10/1/2018

 



10.6†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.6

10/1/2018

 



10.7†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (for replacement awards)

S-8

333-227619

4.7

10/1/2018

 



10.8†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.8

10/1/2018

 



10.9†

 

2018 Stock Incentive Plan of Garrett Motion Inc. and its Affiliates Form of Performance Unit Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.9

10/1/2018

 



10.10†

 

2018 Stock Plan for Non-Employee Directors of Garrett Motion Inc. Form of Stock Option Award Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.10

10/1/2018

 



10.11†

 

2018 Stock Plan for Non-Employee Directors of Garrett Motion Inc. Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement

S-8

333-227619

4.11

10/1/2018

 



10.12†

 

Offer Letter for Olivier Rabiller, dated May 2, 2018

10-12B

001-38636

10.1

8/23/2018

 



10.13†

 

Employment Contract for Alessandro Gili, dated May 2, 2018

10-12B

001-38636

10.2

8/23/2018

 



10.14†

 

Offer Letter for Daniel Deiro, dated June 1, 2018

10-12B

001-38636

10.3

8/23/2018

 



10.15†

 

Offer Letter for Thierry Mabru, dated June 1, 2018

10-12B

001-38636

10.4

8/23/2018

 



10.16†

 

Offer Letter for Craig Balis, dated June 1, 2018

10-12B

001-38636

10.5

8/23/2018

 



10.17†

 

Agreement, dated as of September 2, 2019, between Garrett Motion Inc. and Alessandro Gili

10-Q

001-38636

10.1

11/8/2019

 



10.18†

 

Letter Agreement, dated May 31, 2018, between Honeywell Transportation Systems and Peter Bracke 

10-Q

001-38636

10.2

11/8/2019

 



10.19†

 

Addendum to Employment Contract, dated as of September 3, 2019, between Garrett Motion Sàrl and Peter Bracke 

10-Q

001-38636

10.3

11/8/2019

 



10.20†

 

Non-Employee Director Compensation Program

 

 

 

 

*



10.21†

 

Severance Pay Plan for Designated Executive Employees of Garrett Motion Inc.

 

 

 

 

*



21.1

 

List of Subsidiaries

 

 

 

 

*



23.1

 

Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 

 

 

 

*



23.2

 

Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 

 

 

 

*



31.1

 

Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

 

 

 

 

*

117

 




31.2

 

Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

 

 

 

 

*



32.1

 

Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

 

 

 

 

**



32.2

 

Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

 

 

 

 

**



101.INS

 

XBRL Instance Document

 

 

 

 

*



101.SCH

 

XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document

 

 

 

 

*



101.CAL

 

XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document

 

 

 

 

*



101.DEF

 

XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document

 

 

 

 

*



101.LAB

 

XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document

 

 

 

 

*



101.PRE

 

XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document

 

 

 

 

*


 




*

Filed herewith




**

Furnished herewith




†

Management contract or compensation plan or arrangement
 
Item 16. Form 10- K Summary
None.
118

 
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 




 

Garrett Motion Inc.



Date: February 27, 2020 

By:

/s/ Olivier Rabiller



 

 

Olivier Rabiller



 

 

President and Chief Executive Officer


 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 




Signature

 

Title

 

Date



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Olivier Rabiller

 

President, Chief Executive Officer and Director(Principal Executive Officer)

 

February 27, 2020 



Olivier Rabiller

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Peter Bracke

 

Interim Chief Financial Officer(Principal Financial Officer)

 

February 27, 2020



Peter Bracke

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Russell James

 

Vice President and Corporate Controller (Principal Accounting Officer)

 

February 27, 2020 



Russell James

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Carlos M. Cardoso

 

Chairman of the Board and Director

 

February 27, 2020 



Carlos M. Cardoso

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Maura J. Clark

 

Director

 

February 27, 2020 



Maura J. Clark

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Courtney M. Enghauser

 

Director

 

February 27, 2020 



Courtney M. Enghauser

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Susan L. Main

 

Director

 

February 27, 2020



Susan L. Main

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Carsten J. Reinhardt

 

Director

 

February 27, 2020 



Carsten J. Reinhardt

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 



/s/    Scott A. Tozier

 

Director

 

February 27, 2020 



Scott A. Tozier

 

 

 


 
 
119